Production Transcript for KongPodcast-Week6.mp3




[00:00:00]
>> Hi, Lily Kong.  Welcome to our MOOC.  Thank you very much for spending time and engaging with me on behalf of our participants.  

[00:00:11]
>> It's my pleasure, Kris.  

[00:00:12]
>> I've got a number of questions to ask you, and these will be mostly focused on the Singaporean context and also the National University of Singapore, or NUS as we'll be calling it.  So I guess we might as well start off with the first one, which is, from the perspective of a university like NUS, how has Singapore, the Singaporean context broadly defined, changed since the early 1990's?  

[00:00:41]
>> I think that since the early 1990Õs, there have been tremendous changes in the Singapore context in a variety of ways.  First of all, economically, the shift from much more manufacturing, trade-dependent, banking and finance-based in terms of its economy has shifted tremendously, and a great deal of focus has been placed on, you know, the knowledge economy, so to speak, on the knowledge-based economy. And that has had significant consequences for NUS, which has to do with the way in which we educate students as well as the ways in which we approach research.  So the emphasis on innovation, research, enterprise has become much more marked in Singapore, particularly since the 2000's.  So the shift from a sort of tertiary economic base to a much more highly knowledge-based economy has been quite marked in the last decade or two.  

[00:02:07]
>> Okay.  And you mentioned that NUS started to adapt to a number of these changes with respect to how you educate your students and how you approach research.  Have there been any other sort of significant changes to how NUS has adapted to the structural changes in the nature of Singaporean society and economy?  

[00:02:51]
>> Indeed.  I think that, I mean, certainly in terms of how we've approached education and research, the first thing, I think, that's very notable about how NUS has changed is that in the early 1990's and in years prior to that, I think NUS was primarily a teaching university that emphasized, you know, sort of, graduating students will be able to be part of the economy, the old economy, so to speak.  Since then, this emphasis on students who are much more independent, critical-thinking, creative, interested in innovation and enterprise, all of those qualities are things that NUS have tried to introduce into the curriculum, if you will, or beyond the curriculum in terms of experiential learning.  So NUS has tried to introduce, for example, what we call the NUS overseas colleges, where students participate in internship opportunities for a whole year with start-up companies in different parts of the world, and take technopreneurship, entrepreneurship courses in those particular destinations.  
[00:04:17]
That's just one example of how the education has moved from responding to, you know, the need to produce graduates for a particular kind of economy to producing graduates for a different kind of economy.  In terms of research, nationally, a Research Innovation and Enterprise Council has been established that's headed up by no less than the Prime Minister, and that has, you know, sort of placed a great deal of focus on the need to generate knowledge, to produce knowledge that can contribute to the economy in quite direct ways. So, a huge amount of funding has been set aside since the mid 2000's, since the middle of the first decade of the 2000Õs, to support research. And NUS has responded to that with all kinds of research initiatives from translational medicine, biomedical sciences, to environmental sustainability, and so forth.  

[00:05:04]
>> Okay, that's very helpful.  If perhaps, if we just broaden out a little bit, obviously Singapore is embedded in a regional context with respect to its closest neighbors, Singapore with respect to Malaysia, Indonesia, but also Southeast Asia more broadly, and then even more broadly Pacific Asia. And so, how has that regional context in which NUS has embedded shaped or mediated NUS's development strategy and its tangible development process to date?  

[00:05:17]
>> Singapore is a tiny tiny country, and whatever happens in the region narrowly- or broadly-defined certainly has an impact on Singapore. And NUS situates it within this context has been very conscious about being located in Asia and a part of Asia, so. I say Asia more broadly than Southeast Asia because, of course, the developments in China, and particularly in India, are developments that Singapore and NUS are watching quite carefully.  In higher education, certainly the investments that have been put into universities, selected universities in China and the emphasis that the South Korean government has been putting on its universities, both in terms of funding and research expectations, have been developments that have prompted Singapore to be careful not to rest on any laurels that it might have.  
[00:06:23]
So if you visit Chinese campuses, for example, some of them have received such a large amount of funding that the campuses, both facilities and equipment, that researchers would die for, so to speak.  So and again, if you look at the South Korean context, where there's lots of innovations that are taking place in education, for example, in some of the liberal arts experiments that have taken place in the last few years but also the emphasis on research that sometimes has led to not-so-positive consequences.  The pressures to produce are very strong.  So that sort of context in northeast Asia has prompted NUS to be very much on its toes and to try and ensure that the funding that we have, the initiatives that we put forward, are adequate to compete.  
[00:07:39]
But it's not just about competition as well, it is also about finding opportunities to collaborate. And that collaboration draws from our Southeast Asian location where NUS could be seen to be located in a broader region that offers broader educational opportunities to students in Singapore and from Singapore, but also students who are interested to come from elsewhere to Singapore as a base to understand the region.  

[00:08:12]
>> Okay, that makes a lot of sense.  I guess when you think about the position of Singapore in different scales of regions, more broadly Asia you mentioned, its relations with different parts of Asia but also other parts of the world is in some ways facilitated by flows of students, also at the graduate level or post-graduate level, at the undergraduate level, but also flows of faculty.  So how have the international geographies of the flows of students and new faculty to NUS evolved since the early 1990's?  

[00:08:55]
>> The flows of students to NUS have been very marked since the early 1990Õs, so it's interesting.  I had a friend from college days who came to visit campus not so long ago, and her comment was how, if you walk around campus, you can see very noticeably students who are not of obviously Asian origins. And her remark was that NUS has become much, much more international in a very obvious sort of way.  And that's entirely true.  I think since the early 1990's, both in terms of undergraduates and graduate students, the flows into Singapore and to NUS have increased and the diversity is much more obvious, both in terms of exchange students, short-term visit students, but also in terms of full-time matriculating students.  
[00:10:02]
And that diversity is embraced as a positive thing, because it then produces a multicultural classroom where the pure learning is as important as the learning between faculty and students.  In terms of the flows of faculty, in one sense NUS has always had a very diverse faculty profile, and that has been the case for decades.  It remains true today.  What is interesting, I think, is that at this point in time where you have a lot more Asian students who've gone overseas, particularly to the western economies to pursue their graduate studies, they are now in a position to say, well, I want to return to Asia, not necessarily to my home country, and Singapore is quite an attractive destination, it would seem, for such individuals, I would say returning Asians, not necessarily returning to their home countries but returning to Asia, and Singapore has benefited from that.  

[00:11:23]
>> Okay, I mean, you mentioned that dynamic.  I guess it sort of begs the question: are there any particular sort of key factors or forces shaping this evolution?  

[00:11:37]
>> I think part of it would be the broader forces of change, so, you know, you read and so much of the material that has come out about international student mobility, that there are more students than ever who are crossing borders these days. And Singapore is part of that larger international trend, if you will.  But Singapore, in particular also, I think, has certain things going for it that draw students to Singapore. So, for those who are looking for what I would call a soft landing into Asia, where English is spoken, where you can learn Mandarin, or another Asian language like Vietnamese, or Thai, or Bahasa Indonesia here in Singapore and yet be comfortable in switching back to English if you felt that you had to.  
[00:12:39]
That sort of rather cliched but East-West kind of condition is attractive to students looking to come to Asia without getting too much of a culture shock in the first instance.  At the same time, the mobility of students out of Singapore is very much a condition of the particular geography of Singapore: that we are such a small country, that we have for such a long time being extremely international and outward-looking in many dimensions, in our economy not least, and so students have a certain disposition to travel in a way that students elsewhere, such as in Japan, do not seem to have that same disposition.  

[00:13:30]
>> Okay, that makes a lot of sense.  Thank you.  Now thinking in terms of relations, we might broaden it out now and not just think about student mobility, but let's think perhaps about institutional mobility. And one of the themes in this particular week that we'll be talking about this week, in the Singapore week but also earlier on when we talked about universities and globalizing universities, is the issue of institutional mobility, the stretching out of institutional architectures out across space.  So a variety of the universities from outside of Southeast Asia have established presences within Singaporean territory, with some successes and some failures, like all sort of development processes and experiments.  
[00:14:40]
What do you think some of the key factors are that underlie broadly-defined success but also perhaps as well some of the failures that have occurred, the closures of branch campuses or joint ventures?  

[00:15:00]
>> Right.  ItÕs certainly true that when you look at territories where these sorts of experiments have taken place, the Middle East, China, and Singapore certainly feature quite prominently, and Singapore has certainly had more than its fair share of such experiments.  These experiments are highly, highly complex and complicated, and it's difficult to pin down success or failure to singular factors, so I will attempt to talk about a multitude of factors.  Where there has been success, I think that close partnership has often been a factor.  A close partnership between a university from elsewhere and a local university, a shared commitment, a shared vision, the ability to work closely together in a give-and-take sort of relationship, a deep understanding of the other institution and how it works, and an embeddedness in terms of the relationship so that it is not reliant on two key players, one on each side, for example, that the relationships are deeply embedded within the institutions.  
[00:16:05]
There are models, of course, where there isn't partnership, that the foreign university comes and establishes on its own, there a critical factor has been a business model that will work. And I think it is true to say that those that have succeeded on their own in Singapore and those that have not succeeded, a key difference has been the business model.  So business schools, for example, have tended to work better, theyÕve been able to charge the fees, students have been attracted to come to a part of the world where, you know, the economy is rising and so forth, and they want to be a part of the action and want to study in this part of the world. But in models where the fees are deemed too high, students are not willing to pay for those fees, and the longer-term financial sustainability is in question, then it's been difficult to sustain those ventures.  
[00:17:16]
Of course, failure in a sense does not just boil down to the business model, although I think it's a big part of it.  The other factors that have accounted for success, which is not present, all those things that I spoke about, the sort of trust between two institutions, the willingness to give and take, the very often the embeddedness of the relationships within the institutions, all those sorts of things, if not present, any of it could become sometimes the straw that breaks the camel's back.  

[00:17:59]
>> I mean you raised lots of, I think, key multiple factors that all of sort of come together, and you raised a good point about having it not too dependent upon, you know, a small number of individuals with particular types of relationships, and forging these sorts of partnerships, for example.  But in bringing these sorts of collaborative ventures or perhaps negotiations between, say, a foreign university and the Singaporean state, in the end there are issues of styles of leadership, intercultural capabilities, personality, timing, awareness of timing and different dimensions of what is quick or what is too slow. So are there any sort of intangibles with respect to the set of more nuanced personal leadership dimensions of guiding these sorts of relationships that you might flag as important?  

[00:19:05]
>> Yes.  That's a very good question, and I think very well observed.  I would just clarify that I don't mean to say that these are unimportant, they are critically important.  What I did mean to say by the embeddedness of the relationships and not being reliant on a small handful of people with strong ties and strong relationships, with good understanding, is that over time if the venture is to succeed, the relationships will need to be deeper and broader.  But at the beginning, I think, in terms of making a venture work and to actually get the venture moving along so that, you know, the project progresses from stage to stage,  
[00:20:07]
I think it is very much dependent on individuals.  It is very much dependent on those committed champions who are willing to give their time, who've developed a good understanding of the other party, and who can be translators to their own respective institutions.  So the sort of intermediary or mediator role that a small handful of individuals play is crucially important in the early stages of any discussion or, if you will, negotiation that leads to a full-fledged partnership.  So, I think, in summary, in early days, those individuals with intercultural capability, with particular personalities, with a good sense of the respective institutional cultures, with timing issues and all those sorts of things Ñ those individuals are crucially important right at the beginning. But if the project is to last the long haul, it cannot continue to be reliant on those two, three, four individuals.  

[00:21:36]
>> Okay, well great.  That's very informative.  We might as well, I guess, wrap up and think forward.  You know, Singapore has gone through a lot of changes as you've noted since the 1990's and through the 2000's and after.  Considering the evolution of the higher education landscape to date, and where it might go over the next one or two decades, what do you think some of the key opportunities and also the threats are that NUS may have to grapple with? And I realize there are uncertainties and you never know what might happen in a broader economic or political sense, but what do you think some of the key institutional, perhaps from an institutional perspective, opportunities and threats are?  

[00:22:26]
>> Right.  There are so many changes around us that present opportunities but threats at the same time but one of the things that drives NUS is the opportunity to collaborate, both in terms of finding solutions to many of the social, environmental, economic conditions and challenges that Singapore confronts, but also to collaborate in terms of offering good educational opportunities to students. So, collaboration is a very key characteristic of NUS, if you will.  It's sort of part of our DNA that a recognition that in research, for example, the best research perhaps occurs when you bring multiple parties, multiple perspectives, multiple disciplines together, multiple sources of resource together, multiple resources together, and one of the things that NUS I think has done well and would want to continue to avail itself of the opportunities would be collaborations internationally.  
[00:24:06]
And this, this is a good time to be doing that, because so many other institutions are also looking to collaboration in a way that I think was not as marked even a decade ago, certainly not two decades ago. And the interest in Asia has meant that a lot of institutions are looking to institutions in Asia for collaboration, and the opportunity is there for NUS to make good decisions for which institutions to collaborate with, in what areas, to what effect.  And this is true not just in research but in education as well. And the opportunity that technology presents to collaborate in educational endeavors is certainly perhaps at a high at this point in time, so NUS has been in discussion with some institutions about, you know, what we can do collaboratively to use technology to improve the educational experience for students, what kinds of research can we can do into understanding the impact of technology and education, and so forth.  
[00:25:29]
So collaborations is just one of the many, many, opportunities that we see.  The challenges are many as well.  While a rising Asia means that the opportunities for intra-Asia collaboration grow, it also means that Singapore as a tiny place could quite easily become bypassed for those interested in Asia.  It's not uncommon for people who think of Asia to think of China, and to think of India, and Singapore as a tiny place sometimes still gets mistaken as a part of China or as Hong Kong, for example.  So there's still work to be done.  There's still a lot of work to be done to ensure that Singapore remains relevant and NUS along with it.  

[00:26:34]
>> That's a great way to end up, talking about some of the challenges but then especially some of the opportunities with respect to collaboration. And on that note, we'd like to thank you very much for providing us with some very informative insights into what's going on in Singapore and inside the National University of Singapore, so thank you very much, Lily.  

[00:26:59]
>> It's my pleasure, Kris.  