Production Transcript for MohamadbhaiPodcast.mp3




[00:00:01]
>> Hello, Goolam.  

[00:00:02]
>> Thank you very much for spending some time and sharing some of the, the wealth of your knowledge about the transforming higher education system at a regional scale with respect to Africa and at a global scale. So, welcome to our MOOC.  

[00:00:20]
>> Thank you, Kris.  It'll be nice talking to you again.  

[00:00:23]
>> I've got a, a, a few questions to run through, so how about we start with really the first one, which is a pretty broad one, really.  What do you think some of the main challenges are facing governments in Africa in developing their higher education systems?  

[00:00:42]
>> Well, it's difficult to decide what are the main because challenges are so many and they're all so interlinked.  Let me, let me mention just one important one, and this is increasing access to tertiary education or higher education.  If you look at the figures globally, you find that the, the what they call the participation rate in many countries, it is the number of students who are entering higher education in different countries and different regions, and you compare that with what's happening in sub-Saharan Africa in particular, and I differentiate between north Africa and sub-Saharan Africa.  It's, it's an incredible disparity.  In sub-Saharan Africa, overall we're talking of the order of 8, perhaps to 9 percent of participation rate.  When you look at other regions, even regions of developing countries, we're talking of the order of 25, 30 percent, that order.  
[00:01:43]
So that's, that's a very major challenge, how to increase access to tertiary education in sub-Saharan Africa.  And to it is linked, our link to immediate challenges and that's while you increase access you must ensure equity.  Make sure that the participation for example of women is well-balanced, because participation rates for women in most African countries is extremely low.  We're talking of something like 20 percent or thereabouts in many countries, and also linked to increasing access is to ensure that you increase success.  There's no point in opening the doors to tertiary education and increasing access when a significant proportion of the students fail to move out successfully from the higher education sector.  So, access yes, increasing access yes, but do ensure equity and success.  Also, at the same time, it's extremely important to ensure quality and relevance.  
[00:02:44]
Other two important challenges. Quality: a significant improvement has been made in, in recent years but quality of our education remains a challenge. And so does the relevance because you've seen so clearly, as the number of graduates come out from higher education sector in Africa, there's enormous unemployment of graduates.  It's well known in all parts of the world but it's particularly well known in Africa as well and part of this reason is the lack of linkages with industry and the important sectors employing graduates.  This lack, mismatch between what industry and what the world of work requires and what the universities produced.  Let me quickly talk about too other major, very major challenges.  One is funding of higher education, not just Africa, all over the world, but even more serious in developing countries, in developing countries such as Africa.  
[00:03:45]
How do you fund higher education with realizing that public funds are getting fewer and less and less, and therefore the universities cannot be, the public funding is not available to universities and second, very important challenge.  How do you improve research?  Research output from sub-Saharan Africa is really, really low and that's a very major concern because development in sub-Saharan Africa requires research, relevant in most African contexts and that is not there.  So, you see the list in enormous and where do you attack these challenges?  How do you approach them?  And as you can see, they're very interlinked.  Each one is interlinked to, one challenge is interlinked to the other.  That's a very, very major issue we have.  

[00:04:32]
>> That's a great summary of a whole series, as you said, of interlinked issues.  As you look around the, the global higher education landscape, you can see that a lot of obviously national governments, nation-states are attempting to resolve some of these issues, but also there's a variety of regional agendas and initiatives, for example the European Higher Education Area, as well in Southeast Asia, for example.  So, if, basically, why do you think sub-Saharan Africa should possibly follow suit?  What do you think might be some of the gains of approaching some of these challenges not just at the national level but at a regional level?  

[00:05:19]
>> I would say there are two main reasons.  One is to increase mobility within the sub, within sub-Saharan Africa to allow students and faculty to move within countries in sub-Saharan Africa.  You should look at the mobility figures at the moment, the student mobility, they're the same.  Hardly any mobility exists within Africa.  Most of the mobility takes place from Africa to other parts of the world and that it doesn't benefit really sub-Saharan African countries.  So I would say one of the most important reasons for regionalization would be increasing mobility within Africa.  The second one, the second important reason I would say, would be to enable sharing of resources.  Sharing of resources, the human resources because of shortage of good faculty, of well-qualified faculty having a PhD is one within Africa, and also sharing physical resources.  
[00:06:20]
Some of the equipment required in some laboratories is extremely expensive and you've got not only an investment for it, whereas if, for example, there could be collaboration with universities within the region, they could share some of the laboratory, some of the equipment, within.  And, and it's come out very clearly recently - increasingly within sub-Saharan Africa, they're creating what's known as the Regional Centers of Excellence, and these are basically institutions which are grouping together and collaborating, transnational, I mean, across boundaries in Africa, mainly for postgraduate education, masters and PhD, and for research purposes as well.  So, you've seen very clearly the issue of sharing resources, human and physical, it comes out very clearly in most of these Regional Centers of Excellence.  So these are much of the main reasons - mobility and sharing of resources.  

[00:07:20]
>> Okay.  I guess that leads in to my next question, which you've partially answered, but there may be some more things to say.  I mean, basically in the 2009 communique of the UNESCO World Conference on Higher Education, in the Africa section, it mentioned the need to develop the European, sorry, the African higher education and research area.  What have been the main developments arising from this call and what have been some of the main challenges actually faced with realizing this regional project and you mentioned obviously some of the objectives here but what have been some of the challenges and also some of the practical, tangible achievements?  

[00:08:03]
>> As you rightly point out, the World Conference on Higher Education, the UNESCO World Conference on Higher Education held in 2009 gave a special focus to Africa.  In fact, it devoted half a day to Africa over the, I think it was 3-day, the conference, because of the importance of higher education to Africa.  And 1 of the outcomes of that was a communique especially for Africa.  It was a general communique for the world but at the same time, there was a special communique for Africa.  And in it, it mentioned the importance of creating a higher education and research area within Africa.  Well, following this 2009 conference, one organization called ADEAÑAssociation for the Development of Education in AfricaÑa very important one, in early 2010 decided to take the initiative to convene a group of people, a small group of people, in collaboration with two other important organizations.  
[00:09:24]
One is the African Union Commission and the other one is the Association of African Universities.  So, these three got together and met and decided that there is a commitment that has been, we need to make a commitment to create this higher education and research area.  And they, the committee, the little group of people decided to commission studies to see how to go about it.  First it will identify the areas, creating a higher education area, what does that mean?  What are the areas Africa should emphasize on?  And it created several little studies, they commissioned several little studies, to move the thing forward.  About, it took about a couple of years to work on this so come 2011, 2012, studies were being carried out.  Surveys were carried out in many African countries around the particular studies.  And finally, in March 2013, a draft report was prepared.  Now, the problem has been that since this March 2013 draft report, which is not yet completely available, it's available to a group of people who, you know, initiate the whole movement and, really, honestly, nothing much has happened.  
[00:10:27]
The reason is partly funding perhaps, because you can't just have a report, you need to have meetings to discuss it at higher levels, for example.  The African Union Commission has to play a very important role in it and it has a committee underneath it called COMEDAF, which is the Conference of Ministers of Education of Africa.  It needs to look at it, to agree with what has been proposed, make changes and so on.  The other important stakeholder is the Association of African Universities, speaking as a voice for African higher education.  It needs to have a look at it, and then what's happened in Africa is that each of the five regions in, in the north, south, east and west and center, have what we call RECs, regional economic communities.  They need to have a look at this as well and to agree that for our sub region, this is, this is relevant.  But again, nothing has happened so far, I'm sorry to say and it's, it's just stopped at that level in March 2013.  
[00:11:27]
And I think we need to push the agenda forward and I hope during this particular year there is hope that because there will be COMEDAF meetings to look at it.  This is the Conference of Ministers of Education of Africa.  They will look at it and then, and slowly, gradually push the thing forward.  We must remember that in Europe, where again the whole idea of creating an, a European higher education area was mooted many years ago, it took ten years to get the thing going.  Lots of resources.  So you can't express, expect this to happen in Africa overnight.  It's going to take many, many years.  But at least a start has been made and I hope 2014 will see that start of the creation of an African higher education and research space, by the way.  They call it AHERS now, the commonly used term is AHERS - African Higher Education Research Space rather than area, just to differentiate it from the European Higher Education Area.  

[00:12:26]
>> That's a great summary of the development process and agendas, so, thank you very much.  In the context of other regions, exploring some of these sort of regional agendas and the sharing of resources and the coordination, we've seen the export, or the utilization of some European instruments including, for example, tuning.  In fact, there's tuning experiments going on in the Midwest in the United States, not very far from where I am.  So, the EU, or stakeholders associated with the European Higher Education Area, have been actively promoting its own instruments like tuning for regionalizing higher education in Africa.  What issues does this kind of policy mobility or exchange of instruments present for Africa?  

[00:13:26]
>> Well, I think first of all we must understand that the higher education system in Africa is really very similar to the African higher education system in, in Europe until, you know, the changes started to take place.  There's a great deal of similarity and this is historical because of the way, you know, Africa was colonized, the higher education system was created gradually and so on.  So, this similarity, which is what prompts, really, Africa.  Try and see what the, what is happening in Europe and the same thing for Africa but bearing in mind, it has to be within the African context.  And, I think, too, you've mentioned tuning.  Yes, I will talk about it in a minute but I think there are really two very major instruments that's been used in Europe which are of direct relevance to Africa and which is being used quite extensively.  The first one is the harmonization of the system.  
[00:14:29]
Europe has done it, you've heard of course, with the Bologna Process and Africa is following suit to a large extent, and this specially applies to the Francophone Africa where the system of higher education, the way it calls its diploma as degrees and so on, it's so different from the one that prevails in Anglophone.  And it is also promoting what has already been promoted in Europe, the LFD system.  It starts with first diploma in English, bachelor's, masters' and doctorate system, and most of the Francophone countries in Africa are slowly slowly moving their towards this system, harmonizing key systems so that there can be easy, easy comparison between the Francophone and the Anglophone African countries.  And I think that's very important.  It helps them with regionalization and it helps them with harmonization, which are important.  Tuning, yeah.  Certainly.  Tuning is, I think is an extremely important instrument and I must say although at the time it was produced a couple of years ago, there was a significant amount of reticence among African higher education.  
[00:15:38]
What on earth is this tuning?  Why are we doing this just because out in Europe and other parts of the world are doing it?  But the way the European Union is implementing it in, in Africa is quite interesting.  It has really allowed Africa to develop it according to its own taste, according to its own areas and according to slowly and gradually according to the way it wants to do it.  And I think the most important and interesting thing about tuning is that you, you go about developing a particular, you know, a particular program, a particular course, by consulting the stakeholders.  Making sure that you always consult all of the stakeholders before you have your, you know, your curricula or whatever it is.  And this is important from the point of view of relevance, from the point of view of employment of graduates and so on.  And it started slowly.  A preliminary phase, a pilot phase was started in 2011.  Just five topics were chosen.  
[00:16:39]
In five of the separate things that I mentioned just now and the first phase was ended in 2013.  And I must say, it has been generally speaking, when you talk to the institutions themselves, the African institutions themselves involved in this process, there is a general agreement that this has been extremely positive and we should move this pilot phase to beyond the next phase.  And in fact, a major workshop has been organized by the European Union in March 2014 in Brussels, precisely to look at what has been achieved as far as tuning in Africa is concerned and how, what steps do you take to move it forward, how do you move it forward. Do you extend it to more institutions? Like, at the moment, there are really only five institutions and five topics involved, and do you move it forward like this? Or do you go to other levels?  For example, at the moment it's only undergraduate level.  Do you move it to post-graduate level?  Some of this should be discussed so that tuning can be moved forward.  So, two years ago, a lot of reticence.  Now, I think in Africa, very objectively, there is general agreement that tuning has been good, is a good process and it should be implemented, in fact.  

[00:17:46]
>> And could you just clarify, you mentioned that it's viewed as a, a success there, a positive sort of impacts from working through this process.  What exactly are they to date, at least?  

[00:18:00]
>> Well, the first one is that the way it is being worked out is that, for example, let's take my own subject, that's the civil engineering, that's my background, my own civil engineering, and that's one of the five subjects chosen.  So each, a particular country has, in a particular region, has been asked for civil engineering, you contact ten other institutions, mostly outside your own country, get together and see how you'll need to modify your curricula in civil engineering to ensure that it matches the needs of your stakeholders.  So, because beyond the one institution in one country, this collaboration that takes place there and part of the tuning is also that you must consult other institutions but also the stakeholders in your own country.  Involve, for example, industry, involve students, extremely important.  Involve the students to see whether what do they think about it.  Involve the policymakers.  
[00:19:00]
Make sure that they are happy with what they're doing.  So, you know, there's a lot of consultative process of developing the curricula and using the tuning process.  I think that, to me, is the most important advantage and can hopefully resolve the unemployment and relevance issue that is, as I mentioned right from the beginning, is the important issue for African higher education.  

[00:19:22]
>> Okay, that, that's a great explanation.  Shifting on to the next topic, which is a bit of a broader one and one that's being debated in many parts of the world, is basically: African countries do face and have faced major losses of talent because of brain drain across the region to Europe, to the United States, and possibly more recently to Asia, Pacific Asia.  What do you think about the idea of regionalization, regionalizing initiatives?  Will this perhaps help stem flows of talented people, both students and faculty?  Will this exacerbate and magnify some of these brain-drain tendencies or, what, what are your thoughts about that issue of brain drain vis a vis regionalism and higher education?  

[00:20:22]
>> Okay, I think there's no doubt at all that brain drain has been a major issue in Africa and all the latest figures are not available.  Figures were available after 1970 or 1980.  Lately, its, find it very difficult to get actual figures.  There were specific figures mentioned in studies carried out in, in the 70s and 80s, but now it's very difficult to get exact issue of how, what, how serious is brain drain from Africa but everyone would agree in Africa that brain drain remains a major issue and has to be curtailed as far as possible.  And it's true, most of the brain drain does take place to industrialized countries, to Europe, to the United States and so on.  Is there drain particular to China?  Honestly, I haven't heard much about it.  I've got feedback from China and from African countries sending students to China for postgraduate studies and so on, and the feedback I've got is that hardly anyone stays on in China.  Most of them come back.  And I think drain is even in India, for example.  
[00:21:24]
Generally speaking, brain drain, it does take place but itÕs of very small extent perhaps.  But brain drain, so far, is not a major issue as far as East Asia and China is concerned.  Your question, would regionalization of higher education stop this flow, stem this flow?  Yes, of course.  If you can provide good, relevant higher education within your own country, bearing in mind that funding is so difficult, travel to, you know, to study in the United States, in Europe and elsewhere, and so on, would make a huge difference provided you get the good-quality higher education within your country.  But you know, I think more importantly, the issue, I mentioned the issue of quality, but provided you have quality higher education within your own country in Africa and provided there is political stability and there is, you know, a, the feel-good feeling in a particular country that students would want to stay and study within their own country, that the graduates would not want to go to other countries to work, they would love to stay on and find employment in their own country so they can help to develop their own country.  
[00:22:36]
So, in many instances, I feel the whole issue of brain drain is closely linked to the political and economic situation of the African countries.  And unfortunately, that's not entirely in the hands of higher education in Africa.  That's in the hand of the policymakers in Africa.  They need to rectify their policies.  They need to ensure that policies ensure that all higher education institutions, that they create an environment, a climate which is pleasant, which is safe, which is encouraging for students to study in their own countries and, of course more importantly, to work in their own countries.  It's unacceptable that so many doctors who train sometimes in Africa at huge cost and then they are, they disappear and go to Southern Europe and the United States and so on.  And of course there's a, hue and cry about it, what's really happened.  Yes, of course it's, it's not correct that it happens.  But what's the reason?  Why should somebody stay in his own country and work for peanuts and all, not recognize or even suffer from lots of, perhaps, political oppression and all the rest of it.  
[00:23:39]
So, I think brain drain is an issue but it's a deep issue and it cannot be solved by higher education alone.  It has to be solved by policy makers to ensure that they create the right environment to avoid brain drain.  

[00:23:54]
>> Okay.  And I will I guess close off now and give, just give you a moment to reflect or reinforce any, any key themes or messages you'd like to, to convey in relationship to the idea of region-building and higher education with respect to Africa, and sub-Saharan Africa in particular.  So, are there any sort of core messages you'd like to reinforce that we haven't been able to touch upon?  

[00:24:22]
>> I think if I had to pick one main issue facing sub-Saharan African higher education and regionalization is one that perhaps IÕve already touched, but I'd like to emphasize on it and this is all policymakers to work together with higher education stakeholders.  Higher education is very important.  It is, you know, so important that it involves every country, the governments of every country.  But it, it's a very specific area and universities and other higher education institutions have their own way of functioning and operating and so on.  So, these two entities, the higher education sector and the policymaking sector, the governments of Africa, have to find a way of sitting around a table, talking to each other and agree on how to move forward.  I did explain the old process of creating the AHERS, the African Higher Education and Research Space.  
[00:25:26]
This has not yet happened and to me, that's the greatest stumbling block.  You need to have, for example, the African Union Commission to work very closely with the Association of African Universities.  There are regional bodies within Africa, there as well, the policymakers, as well with the appropriate higher education institution, organization, and I think once this is solved, once they agree on the move forward, how to move forward, then I think a lot of the stumbling blocks of region building will slowly disappear.  

[00:25:58]
>> Okay.  Well, that's a, that's a great message and a nice way to wind up our Q and A session.  So, I'd like to say on behalf of everybody participating in the MOOC, myself and Susan Robertson, thank you very much for all of your insights.  We really appreciate it.  

[00:26:14]
>> Thank you, Kris.  It's been nice talking to you and thank you for giving me this opportunity of sharing some of my thoughts about African higher education.  

[00:26:23]
>> Okay, thank you.  Goodbye.  

[00:26:25]
>> Bye.  