Production Transcript for VanDamme Podcast - Week 5.MP3




[00:00:01]
>> Hello, Dirk.  The students in our course, obviously they know a bit about the OECD, because we've been learning about it, we’ve written a little bit about it. They're following some links; they've seen your profile.  But it would be helpful to know what you think, as an informed staff member and representative of the OECD -- what do you think the distinctive role the OECD is?  What role does it play in framing, thinking, basically, about the transformation of higher education systems, policies, and programs?  So what is its distinctive role?  

[00:00:46]
>> I think its distinctive role depends on its position in, let's say, the knowledge flows in global society and at large.  So we are not a research university -- we are not a university -- and we are not a government.  But I think our power is coming from mediating between these knowledge fields. So I think we are very good in bringing together knowledge and generating evidence by doing some research, and of course our well-known products — PISA, the Adult Skill Survey — are good examples of some work we do ourselves to generate the evidence.  But I think in general our core business is bringing the evidence to policy-makers, to those who are translating the needs of policy makers to evidence-based questions.  
[00:01:48]
So it's a kind of two-way process, with the ultimate purpose of feeding the critical dialogue among stakeholders, among policymakers, also among their situations in the field of higher education, and to ultimately foster something which we call peer learning, or, yeah, all kinds of concepts, peering, fueling countries as well.  But peer learning I think is the main concept describing what we do.  So, we are a little bit like, like a think tank.  We don't have real political power, but we sometimes have soft power, setting standards, influencing what really is the core international debate, promoting convergence, but always based on sound evidence.  That's too many words already, but I think that's the essence of what the OECD is doing.  

[00:02:53]
>> Okay, that's a very good explanation.  You mentioned similarities in some ways with think tanks.  Are there any similar organizations to the OECD, with respect to the higher education role that you play?  

[00:03:08]
>> Yeah.  Well, the World Bank has a little bit of the same kind of work, but not to the extent -- in my belief, not of the same impact because it's concentrated on developing countries, and it's very much linked to financial operations.  But I don't see major competitors in that kind of arena.  That may be not a very good thing because maybe you should have a little bit of competition, but I think we are expanding and flourishing so much because of the need of that kind of work, and the absence of many people filling that hall.  We have some private companies, not so much in higher education, but in school education, have been the Pearson Foundation and have other foundations, mainly in the U.S., etc. But on an international level with that scope, also with these resources, I don't see an alternative.  

[00:04:11]
>> Yeah.  Okay.  I mean, do you think, on a related note, and I may jump ahead to another question here.  Do you think, given the increasing importance of higher education to societies, to economies and so on, do you think that the landscape of international organizations and all the other agencies and stakeholders who play a role in generating debate and thinking about governance issues, do you think that that landscape is optimally configured right now?  Again, related to the fact that higher education is increasingly important worldwide.  

[00:04:50]
>> My answer to the question, would be no.  I don't think that the -- I think that -- it is linked to, of course, the broader analysis of globalization, of what's going on and which what we try to capture with that word “globalization”.  I think in the field of research and higher education in general, things are changing so rapidly. Of course there are many good things, but there are also many dangers and many risks to watch.  And maybe, just to name one example, there is the risk of diploma mills, etc., as just one example.  But I don't think that the configuration of, let's say, international or global governance is well-structured to deal with these issues.  That's not unique for higher education.  I don't think we -- if you looked at a completely different sector like environment policy, it's a bit better organized, or at least — or health, it’s better organized.  
[00:05:51]
I don't think that we do a very good job in the international community of taking care —  I'm not saying controlling or mastering all of that — it's just taking care of this enormous development which globalization means for higher education.  

[00:06:12]
>> That's a very, very good response.  Thank you.  Thinking more internally, with respect to what you do, what are the key challenges in developing a common base for comparison at a suprainternational scale?  There is a lot of comparative work that has been done -- research and so on -- the skill survey being an example of a most recent one.  What are the key challenges in developing a common basis for comparison?  A legitimate basis for comparison?  

[00:06:45]
>> In the field of higher education?  

[00:06:46]
>> Yes, higher education.  

[00:06:50]
>> For me, the main challenge is the unit of analysis, because we are used to working with countries, and also for school education.  Maybe a country is not a very, it's not a perfect level of analysis, but we are used to that.  Governments identify with that kind of analytics, but in higher education it's definitely not the best way to do it.  But I believe that these situations are not providing the best alternative either.  I share the view of some experts that we are moving gradually to a phenomenon which we label “deinstitutionalization of higher education”, or “debundling”, or — all de- words which indicate negative connotations, but which just are used because of the lack of better positive alternatives to describe what's going on.  I'm just saying that the institutional level is a helpful level, but it's not solving all of the possible problems.  
[00:07:57]
So, my main point is that the challenge is really the unit of analysis, and we see that also in AHELO, will be focused on institutions and how they do, but the departments in institutions differ a lot, etcetera.  Countries is, in my view for higher education, more and more a meaningless level of analysis.  

[00:08:18]
>> Okay.  Okay, thank you.  The OECD has been described as a piece of learning machinery by some people.  Assuming you agree -- and feel free to disagree -- how do you know if you, representing the OECD here, have achieved your desired learning outcomes or objectives?  

[00:08:40]
>> You know, that's a very good question.  I did some work on learning organizations in the past.  I would not describe the OECD internally as a very well-organized and well-performing learning organization, although we work with knowledge. The OECD internally is a mixture of a learning organization and a bureaucracy, so it tries to move in different rationales and different ways of doing business and doing our work.  In some areas, like in staff recruitment we -- I think we are doing even a better job than most universities, but then in other areas we act just like an old French bureaucracy, so a lot of internal tensions.  Whether myself have been learning a lot, well, I've been working five years for the OECD, and I said to my wife some time ago, in fact I have learned more and am intellectually more challenged, because maybe that's a better word in the OECD, than I was in my academic career.  
[00:09:59]
So, it is a very intellectually challenging environment, and the standards are very high because of the quality of the staff, the challenges that countries put forward to you, et cetera.  So if you see a learning organization from that perspective, challenging staff members and challenging everyone involved in giving the best possible intellectual endeavor, then I think it's doing a good job.  

[00:10:31]
>> Okay, thank you.  Why do you think different member countries take so much notice of your findings that are presented in various reports?  Again, the Skills Report most recently, Education at a Glance, and so on.  So, why do you think they take so much notice of it?  

[00:10:58]
>> Well, maybe because we fulfill a need without being confronted with too many competitors, or too many challenges even, but ultimately I think because of the quality of the work.  That sounds a bit pretentious, but I do think that.  Yet you could see the function of the OECD from a perspective of global governments or of convergence, et cetera, but we should, we would not have the same impact if the quality would not be what it is today.  And working here internally, I see the amount of energy and the demands put on every face over development of a project.  I'm used to an academic context where people -- researchers are also confronted with high-quality demands.  
[00:12:00]
But it is quite something different here at the OECD, so we are incredibly challenged at that level, and we are very afraid of someone finding out and making a legitimate claim that, for example, this instrument in PISA is worthless.  There have been some attempts to undermine PISA in France, with French professors who -- but, when this claim, this attack was scrutinized by the best international experts that we have, they couldn't find anything. So we believe that we have to produce a high level of quality in order to have impact.  

[00:12:56]
>> Yeah, I mean it's on display.  It's out there for assessment.  

[00:13:01]
>> Yeah, we are very vulnerable.  

[00:13:02]
>> Yes.  Okay.  Moving on to a specific initiative, again, we'll have some background to some of the various OECD initiatives, one being AHELO.  What have been the main challenges in getting AHELO going?  

[00:13:23]
>> Well, at the moment now, we are at a crucial turning point in the development of AHELO, so the feasibility has been completed, and now countries have to make up their minds.  There's a new paper introduced to them which will be discussed in November, and then a decision will have to be made.  So we are at a crucial point.  I was involved in the very early stages of the process.  I was a member, before I even joined the OECD, of the expert group preparing the field a little bit, and I think that the basic rationale and the need for doing something like AHELO is absolutely indisputable.  It's very high.  So then you have this enormous need and demand, I think the global higher education system needs something like AHELO, despite all the resistance and all the discussions, but to fulfill that need with a high-quality study with trustworthy instruments, with all the problems associated with the sampling — response rate, etcetera, etcetera —  
[00:14:45]
to solve all these issues is an incredibly difficult endeavor.  So the challenges are very high. And second, I think there is also a high level of resistance in the academic community.  Which, maybe in the early days of PISA there was a kind of similar resistance, and I myself attended meetings 15-20 years ago that measuring the learning outcomes of fifteen-year-olds was completely unthinkable and then not possible, let alone comparing them across countries with all these traditions and cultures, etcetera.  So it's not unique to AHELO, but unique to AHELO is that somehow it's seen by professors in leading universities as challenging part of their authority.  I'm trying not to formulate it too negatively because I'm very critical about that kind of attitude, but I try to understand where this resistance comes from, and it comes from an element which is very peculiar to the academic system, which is the combination of authority, pride -- the idea that there is something hidden in the academic education, which is very difficult to dismantle and to deconstruct and which should also be protected.  
[00:16:27]
So there's a kind of protectionism and a kind of well-meant idea that this is very good in itself, and anything that tries to measure something which is so brilliant should fail -- so that's a little bit my approach to that.  

[00:16:47]
>> And interestingly, there is so much knowledge and effort being put into trying to understand learning outcomes, state learning outcome objectives in syllabi, and then assess them with respect to, for example, on a yearly basis, with respect to departmental reviews, so that learning-outcomes agenda is...  

[00:17:09]
>> Absolutely.  

[00:17:10]
>> ...being pushed to many different levels right now.  

[00:17:12]
>> But still I think you would find many individual professors who think that learning outcomes are still something reductionist, and that they do no justice to the core values of the academic enterprise.  And I believe that there is a kind of resistance there which is -- with which we are faced a lot in the development of AHELO, and I'm not saying that this resistance should be broken or whatever, but that we are trying hard to confront that in a constructive way.  And that poses a lot of really difficult problems.  

[00:17:54]
>> Okay, well, thank you, thank you for the illuminating response there.  I guess my final question is on a related point.  Is, from your informed perspective, what do you think some of the key benefits and problems are in relationship to the emergence of, and now quite significant presence of, world university rankings by organizations like, firms like QS, Thompson, Reuters with Times Higher, and the folks behind the Asian ranking of world universities?  

[00:18:34]
>> Yeah.  Well, my basic attitude is that the rankings are there, they will not go away.  Because they fulfill a very elementary need of consumers, stakeholders, students’ families, governments, to compare things.  I think comparing things is a very basic cognitive operation which we do in everyday life.  And of course it’s reductionist, it brings complex realities back to a simple one-dimensional scale.  But there is this famous joke about a university professor who was arguing against rankings and why they are so bad at them, and the journalist asks him, "Where do you want your daughters -- where do you want to send your daughter to study medicine?"  And he said, well my first choice would be, and then my second choice would be, and my third choice would be -- so just to illustrate that ranking is a normal human cognitive tool to make complex information manageable.  
[00:19:45]
I know the literature.  They have a lot of perverse effects, which I think should be recognized and should be discussed, but at the same time I think the quality of the rankings is improving in general.  Some are better than others.  But I have collaborated a few times with some of them, and I really think that they are doing a serious job in trying to make their measurements better, to move away from purely reputation-based assessments to more evidence-based assessments.  But of course on -- in many aspects of the academic system, the basic data are not there, so you have to rely on proxies, you have to do the best possible job you can do.  But in the end I think the reality of most of the rankings, at least the three dominant ones, is not too bad in my view from a methodological perspective, and they make a very complex and diffuse reality transparent.  
[00:20:59]
And in my view they have caused -- yeah, they have caused a little bit of dynamism in the global system.  Again, with some perverse effects, and I think that, as any ranking, the top receives too much attention.  Sometimes the small differences between universities following each other in the rank are exaggerated, because while they are statistically meaningless.  So there are a lot of problems, but in the end it has promoted transparency and I think the academic system is in need of more transparency.  

[00:21:38]
>> Okay.  Great, well, thank you very much and thank you for speaking to us at our MOOC.  

[00:21:44]
>> It was my pleasure.  Thank you.  