Production Transcript for Egron-PolakPodcast.mp3




[00:00:02]
>> Eva, thank you so much for agreeing to have a conversation around many of the issues that your organization, the International Association of Universities, of which you are the secretary general, are having.  And I'm wondering if we can start there, with your organization, about the conversations, the kinds of values that are part of those conversations, that you're having in your organization around higher education in a global world.  

[00:00:31]
>> OK.  Thanks, Susan.  Well, I think that one of the key issues for IAU, for the International Association of Universities, is to address topics that are of interest and importance to institutions around the world. Because we have members in every part of the world, we can't focus very easily on issues that may only be of interest to a small part.  So, that is one of the key selecting criteria, if you will, for the topics we address.  And of course when you look around what's happening in higher education globally, a few issues pop out.  One of the first ones, I would say, is the extent to which internationalization and its cousin globalization are changing institutional priorities, institutional resources, focus, et cetera. That's a very big chunk of what we look at, is, what are some of the trends in internationalization, what are some of the risks, what are benefits, challenges.  
[00:01:43]
That's one big pocket, and I can come back to that later.  A second one that we've identified as being really perennial in every part of the world is issues of equitable access to higher education.  Whether its in countries where you have an aging population and so you need to broaden the base of access to people who otherwise may not have thought of going to university, or whether its in countries where you really just need to increase the number of higher education-going students, that issue — how to broaden access while maintaining relevance and quality — is a topic that we work on because it is important across the world.  A third area, and there are many more, but the third one I would focus on is really the social responsibilities that universities have, and higher education institutions have.  
[00:02:47]
And the social responsibility agenda can be looked at in different ways.  We focused on a couple of areas. The one is looking at the whole area of sustainable development.  What are responsibilities of universities and researchers and, as research organizations but also as teaching organizations, to instill some issues of sustainable development into the education and research.  And so, we have a whole, we have a portal — and we work on gathering up what is being done in very innovative ways around the world — around the theme of meeting the sustainable development challenges.  And another area, which I also sort of put under the social responsibility, is the role that universities play in the educational sector more broadly. As an organization that’s close to the UN, being placed at UNESCO,  
[00:03:52]
the Millennium Development Goals agenda is important for us, and in particular the Education For All agenda.  And we've noticed that universities are not considered as players in that.  

[00:04:07]
>> That's interesting, because my reading of that post-2015 agenda is that higher education is regarded as a-- the prior-- an important priority area so that-- in fact right now I would have thought that universities ought to be in there shaping up those discussions, because some of the players that I see shaping the discussions are for example Pearson Education, Brookings Institute and so on.  

[00:04:34]
>> Well, I think it depends on which agenda we're looking at.  If we're looking at the post-2015 development agenda, I think there's still a struggle to get higher education seen as a very important actor.  If you're looking at the competitiveness agenda in Europe, for example, higher education is central.  But it's not the case everywhere.  And so, in a sense I think there is still a need for universities, and higher education as a sector, to demonstrate their utility in this word-- really the utility to address some of the major challenges.  You're still accused of not doing that.  

[00:05:20]
>> What would you say, then, are the trends that you're looking at that should be discussed?  I mean one that I see that characterizes the sector is that, you know, education is being pushed into being much more export-driven on the one hand.  And another kind of angle on it is, perhaps, pushing it to be in a more privately-oriented with for-profit players in the sector and so on.  And while I know that's not the agenda everywhere, it does seem to be quite a prominent set of dynamics.  I mean, in your view, what conversation should we be holding around, you know, is it trade, is it, you know, do we rework the sector to include, you know, for-profit actors?  What would be some of the elements that you'd like to see put on the table there?  

[00:06:12]
>> Well, I think what you're describing is an agenda that's really being driven by resources rather than by need, expectations, or relevance.  And I think that's really fundamental. If we were to have a conversation about higher education and what it should or could be, I think it would be really important not to simply look at what can be funded, how can the sector be maintained, but also, what is really needed. Because I think some of those providers that you outlined, yeah, they do perhaps respond to a short-term need for skills.  But, in my view and in the view I think of the IAU, they're not really as much a part of a full higher education, that comprehensive higher education sector as we're trying to promote.  
[00:07:23]
I think the issue is about diversity.  

[00:07:30]
>> Yeah, yeah.  

[00:07:30]
>> And-- but, a diversity that recognizes how the various parts fit in, and how each of the various parts brings relevance and quality into the whole mix.  I don't think we have figured that out yet.  I think we are in a highly competing and competitive sector of education where we see concentration of resources going to the few.  And in that respect, instead of promoting diversity, I think we're promoting or creating stratified systems.  And one of our concerns is, who do those systems include and exclude in a country?  What issues do they cover or not?  If you look at the disciplinary mix of the private providers, are they comprehensive?  Probably not.  So, I think it is really an issue of how can we create a conversation that isn't only looking at resourcing — and in a sense necessity to go the private route, necessity to concentrate funds and therefore create competition between institutions?  
[00:08:55]
I'm not sure we have the solutions, but we as IAU are really promoting the value of a diverse system.  

[00:09:04]
>> And I can see that that's an important conversation, you know, when I'm looking at, you know, some of the big agendas.  There might be a lot of talk or a lot of, you know, thought going into making it look as if they're creating very reflexive creative individuals and so on.  But it seems to me there's a narrowing of that.  And then, what you're calling for clearly is a bigger conversation, around bigger problems and bigger efforts and bigger conversations that look at those social problems in the world.  I can see that you are initiating some of these conversations, and I wonder if you could talk to us about them through your north-south and south-south collaborations.  

[00:09:57]
>> Yeah.  

[00:09:57]
>> And is that what’s at the heart of these kinds of collaborations?  

[00:10:02]
>> Well, I think at the heart of them is to really get at the notion of, are we truly in a global system or are we truly building a global landscape? Or, is this a global landscape that excludes some-- some systems, some countries, some types of institutions completely?  And as we saw that the whole process of internationalization was a key driver of that creation of a new global landscape of higher education, we started to look at how internationalization can in a sense be a conversation that includes all the voices.  So, we started something called the Rethinking Internationalization Initiative.  For example, that's one example where we highlight some of the potential negative impacts that internationalization can bring like the brain drain, like the notion that we will all use English, the homogenization of the languages that we use in higher education.  
[00:11:23]
Looking at how this process is perceived in our-- in the countries where we have members.  So, we started serving our membership and started reporting and analyzing some of the results.  And for me, highlighting how some institutions perceived what we think is a very positive trend, how some institutions perceived that as creating risks for them or bringing some unintended consequences was enough for us to ring the alarm bells.  And I think as a consequence I was just in South Africa where I was invited to a global dialog on internationalization, where the values that we promoted were put on the table as something that everyone should keep in mind as they create partnerships, as they develop linkages, as they create movement of students, student-exchange programs, et cetera.  
[00:12:27]
To me, that's a really successful initiative of moving-- making certain that we don't look at developments only from the perspective of where we sit but actually we look at our international partnerships from both sides.  How does it impact, what are we getting out of it, but what do our partners get out of it and are we on the same page when we design these projects?  

[00:12:56]
>> So, it seems what you're asking the-- what you're also creating a space for is a way of asking different kinds of questions, really, aren't you here?  

[00:13:08]
>> Yeah.  

[00:13:08]
>> And then looking at the ways in which those questions migh find themselves emerging in new kinds of practices, or an ethical practice around partnership, linkages, and so on.  Are there parts of the world that you do worry about that, you feel there aren't those global conversations going on sufficiently?  

[00:13:30]
>> Well, I think-- well, I don't think I worry about parts of the world so much as the fact that there are some, in a sense, some institutions that are less and less party to those conversations.  And I think one of the trends — we haven't talked about it — but one of the trends that is shaping the global landscape are international rankings.  And the way the international rankings impact on collaboration is really getting very pervasive in the sense that there are institutions in parts of the world that do not get into the top 500.  Probably maybe not even to the top 1,000.  And therefore, to-- for them to seek partners and collaboration and to extend links with other parts of the world becomes next to impossible.  And I don't believe that the international rankings ever thought that this impact would be there.  
[00:14:33]
But what we're actually doing is excluding some institutions, those that might most benefit from collaboration, those that might bring us more in terms of understanding other contexts.  They're being excluded from those conversations.  So, it's not really countries per se, although there are some in that case as well.  But it's really institutions, and I think that is a worrisome trend. Especially since the policy to promote collaboration with the best and the pursuit of this quote-unquote excellence is really a very strong driving force which is difficult to question. Who would not want to be in an excellence kind of partnership?  And yet, I think we need to stop and think what does it mean for those who may not be selected as the excellent partners.  
[00:15:42]
You see what I'm getting at?  

[00:15:44]
>> Yeah.  OK.  And so-- and looking at countries that we've profiled, for example, in countries like China or indeed I know Taiwan, certain institutions are being selected as the targets of government funding.  And that's not innocent, in a way, because not only does it differentially benefit some institutions versus the other, but actually what we've seen is, you know, institutions themselves actually trying to change their structures and ways that--  

[00:16:14]
>> That's true.  

[00:16:15]
>> -- even inappropriate--  

[00:16:16]
>> Exactly.  

[00:16:16]
>> -- for their communities.  Yeah.  

[00:16:18]
>> Yeah.  And I think that in a way that is a bit of the problem, in the sense that the unintended consequences of the rankings which I think were probably at one point hoping that they would simply contribute to raising quality.  They are actually, because of the concentration of funds that may result in a given country which really wants to be in the top 500, and can only potentially afford to have only one institution in that top 500, will undermine the strength and quality of the rest of that sector because the money becomes-- the funds become so concentrated.  That is acting something that is worrisome.  And we have come out and made such statements.  The other side is that, for example, countries that create new collaborative programs will stipulate that their beneficiaries of these programs, whether its students or researchers, can only collaborate with a certain group of institutions.  
[00:17:32]
Again, very exclusionary to those that may not be among those top 500.  So, I think that when you consider that globally there are about 18,000 higher education institutions, concentrating on such a small number is really not what the global system may need.  

[00:17:57]
>> Now, if we could present that as a conversation to be had amongst our MOOC participants, I mean, how could you frame that up as a big challenge?  What would you-- how would you-- could you kind of put that, or would you see that as one of the biggest-- one of the big conversations our MOOC participants could have?  

[00:18:19]
>> Well, I think that the challenge is in finding exactly what it is that rankings offer that nothing else seems to be able to offer in quite the same simple way. Because I think there is a legitimate need to understand this large and vast amount of institutions.  The students need to know, policy-makers, employers, they all need legitimately to know, when an institution is set up or exists, what its bona fides are, whether it provides what it says it provides.  And so, the rankings have been able to say, “We are a simple way of providing you with a test of quality,” if you will.  I think the conversation has to be about how otherwise can we ensure that the system-- higher education system globally —becomes more transparent, more easily navigated.  
[00:19:30]
And how else can we make certain that institutions can, in a sense, be compared and understood in their full diversity.  To be honest, I don't have an answer, but I think it's that conversation that needs to be taking place. Otherwise, we will remain with a very hierarchical and fairly-- I think potentially dangerous system of continuously putting institutions in a strat-- hierarchical list where some will find themselves on the losing end.  

[00:20:12]
>> Now, I'm now wondering if we could go to this last question around those who are around the table and perhaps making decisions, and I'm wondering if in that current, let's say, global policy-making space that there-- is there enough room for non-governmental organizations like the one that you represent that actually represent universities around the world?  I mean, how do you read that kind of environment and what ought to happen?  

[00:20:47]
>> Well, I think there was recently a conversation started, or a couple of them, around the fact that there really isn't a very strong intergovernmental body that represents all of the interests.  UNESCO, of course, is the agency or UN agency with that mandate, but in recent years UNESCO as a whole has suffered and higher education within UNESCO has suffered cuts and decreasing in capacity.  OECD of course doesn't represent the global set of nations, and so, there is an absence.  I'm not sure that we are ready or we are-- what's the word?  Whether there is even a clear-cut role for what a global body of that ilk should do or could do.  Do we want to regulate at the global level?  
[00:21:51]
I think the biggest challenge is to have the capacity to bring voices together.  And the second — and that I think IAU can do and in collaboration with regional partners and non-governmental organizations could do.  I think the issue isn't coming together around issues.  I think the issue is coming together and then acting.  That's the frustrating part I think for organizations like IAU that have no clear target of a policy-making sort to which we can advocate certain things.  I'll give you an example.  Our statements, which I think are fairly well-regarded by the higher education community, usually make recommendations to the institutions about how they should act and to governments how they should act, but not having an interlocutor at the governmental level makes it very difficult to see action implemented.  
[00:23:00]
If you look at the regional level, the European Union and therefore the European University Association is a very clear partnership, if you will.  The EUA can, together with its members, establish clear policy directions and has the EU as a very nice target to advocate for those positions.  There is no such thing at the global level and I don't think even in the next short while there will be a much, much stronger UNESCO.  So, the alternative is for the organizations, non-governmental organizations, to act together, which we try to do, and there have been-- I mean IAU organizes every two years a meeting of all the regional associations around the world.  We've held our meetings in India.  
[00:24:00]
We've held our meetings in Alexandria, Egypt.  Our next one is in Accra, Ghana.  The problem is-- well, the problem is — the issue becomes, once we can discuss these matters collectively, what do we do then?  How do we implement and what do we implement and how do we police-- police or, not the right word.  How do we monitor whether our declarations, our intents are actually realizable?  That's where the weakness is, and I think that is the major challenge.  We can have major debates, and I think even UNESCO has had wonderful major debates, about the issues in higher education.  It's the actions that follow that are almost nonexistent, and that's I think where we need to think much more creatively,  
[00:25:04]
and maybe look at other sectors such as the health sector around the world.  Have they found a solution that this higher education sector hasn't found?  You can I think look at other sectors, learn from them, because so far I don't think we have the solutions yet.  

[00:25:27]
>> That sounds like a really good point to stop, because what I think you’ve flagged up is actually some of the limits at the moment of living in a global world with political structures that are actually more closely tied to national systems.  

[00:25:42]
>> Yeah.  

[00:25:43]
>> Yeah.  

[00:25:43]
>> Yeah.  

[00:25:44]
>> So, Eva, thank you so much for your great insights and a terrific conversation around the issues, and we wish the organization really well into the future.  

[00:25:56]
>> Thank you very much, Susan.  