Production Transcript for Madeleine Green podcast.mp3




[00:00:00]
>> Hi Madeleine.  Welcome to our MOOC.  

[00:00:04]
>> Thank you, Kris.  Good to be here.  

[00:00:07]
>> Okay so I've got a few questions for you today related to this common term that we keep hearing about, in particular in the United States but also in a number of other countries or some variation of it, and really the term that we'd like to focus on, with respect to our Q&A broadcast, is global competency.  So why don't we start straight off and ask the question really, what is global competency?  

[00:00:37]
>> Well first of all I would refer to multiple competences.  We tend to roll it up into one term but when thinking about global competency or competence, most institutions try to unpack this concept, which I think is a very good thing to do.  They frequently, but not always, talk about three major areas of global competency: knowledge, skills and attitudes, and I prefer the term mindset to attitudes.  So, for example, under knowledge one might find some of the following competencies: knowledge of global issues, processes, trends or systems or knowledge of other cultures and histories.  Under skills one might find ability to use several cultural frames of reference or alternative perspectives, to think critically and solve problems.  
[00:01:41]
Another skill is to communicate in another language or to be able to work with people in diverse backgrounds.  Mindsets I think is the trickiest one, but those are often part of global competence and examples might be willingness to navigate cultural differences and cultural ambiguity or willingness to seek out international or intercultural activity.  So in short I think competency is a very rolled up concept and is clearest when you start thinking about what are the elements of global competence.  

[00:02:26]
>> Okay that makes sense.  Where did the idea of global competence come from?  And I imagine it, you know, comes up and emerges in different contexts and different ways but from your perspective, where does this idea actually come from?  Who sort of invented it, if you will?  

[00:02:44]
>> Well I don't really know the answer to that question.  I have to be quite frank about that.  My sense is that the competence part is a preoccupation of the more developed higher education systems, the U.S. and Europe, that are really trying to get their arms around outcomes, learning outcomes both at the degree and the program level.  I think global is a term that's banded around by everybody and every culture has very different baggage but the competency piece I think is kind of, as far as I can see, an American and European obsession.  The term global, international, intercultural, again when we try to deconstruct it, these three are often used interchangeably, although they have different nuances of meaning.  
[00:03:50]
The Europeans talk about intercultural competence much more than they talk about global competence.  We all talk, and all meaning especially the Americans and the Europeans but increasingly in other countries, talk about internationalization as the process to produce global competence.  So I think I'm putting the emphasis on competence, what we would call in the U.S. assessing student learning outcomes.  That varies tremendously among countries.  Many countries are looking at outcomes for degrees to qualifications frameworks but that doesn't always translate into a plan to actually achieve these goals or develop the competences.  So what I'm saying is it's one thing to state the competencies and another to actually know what students are assessing.  

[00:04:54]
>> Okay.  I guess you've sort of raised a number of issues that were sort of highlighted in the question I was going to ask.  I mean are there any other sort of terms that keep getting bandied about in the work that you've been doing for the International Association of Universities recently?  You mentioned intercultural competency, you mentioned and you've written about citizenship issues and so on.  You've talked about learning outcomes but are there other keys of intersecting terms that have been emerging at this particular point in time that are worth noting, if students in our course are interested in this topic in more detail?  

[00:05:36]
>> Well I think the first thing to say is the language is all over the map and people use the same words with different meanings, sometimes they use different terminology for the same concept so some people talk about internationalization of the campus of curriculum, some people talk about globalization of the campus of curriculum.  For some people, globalization has a kind of negative tinge because it smacks of western hegemony.  So this is really a linguistic tangle.  And I think it depends on where you're putting the emphasis.  Global citizenship puts the emphasis on why are you doing this global learning, puts the emphasis on the teaching and learning piece, which is presumably a means to an end.  When I work with institutions I suggest they pick their term and define it because there's simply no agreement on language.  

[00:06:42]
>> Okay, okay, that makes sense.  In the United States, where you're based, who are the key actors or stakeholders and some of the associated networks that are pushing this particular agenda?  So it's come to the floor, it's being discussed and debated, it's being discussed in my institution, for example, whether or not we need to create some general education requirements related to this particular phenomena, so let's maybe open up the black box and actually sort of see who's behind this, who's pushing this agenda and what are their core objectives.  

[00:07:21]
>> Well in some countries there's a lot of push coming from the government and the ministries and that is simply not the case in the United States.  I would say that the only significant external push are the regional accreditors who aren't as much interested in global as they are interested in competence.  The regional accreditors in the United States have put a lot of emphasis in the past 20 years on assessing learning outcomes and to the extent that global learning or global competence is part of a larger package, it's part of the push to answer the question, how do we know our students are learning what we think they're learning?  So there is significant, the accreditors are playing a significant role.  But when it comes to being, to the architecture of the curriculum, in the United States that is really largely institutional matter, with the exception of some public boards and systems where there are some system wide requirements.  
[00:08:35]
So you really need to look to what the curricular priorities are, where the faculty is on this issue because generally if there's going to be a push for global competence it's going to come at the institutional level and probably from the faculty.  And here I'm talking about the teaching and learning piece.  I'm not talking just about study abroad or international students but what are students learning largely in the classroom and how do you know it?  In many U.S. institutions, a lot of the global competence is wrapped into the general education curriculum, that is the first two years where students acquire critical thinking and analytical skills and dip into a variety of disciplinary areas.  So there's faculty and a third set of stakeholders that holds the international agenda near and dear to their hearts are the international administrators on campus, ranging from the chief international officer at the very senior level to studying abroad advisor.  
[00:09:56]
They have professional associations, NAFSA, the Association of International Educators, the Association of International Education Administrators, there are professional associations that provide resources and advocacy on the national level.  Their advocacy is both to the U.S. Government, which is not a big player in internationalization, and to the campus, which is if you're serious here is some resources on how to do it.  

[00:10:26]
>> And I mean you mentioned a little bit about a somewhat perhaps stronger role of state in some context, is there a sort of a pattern to the sort of global geography of the pursuit and adoption of the concept of the global competency where so what other sort of countries or regions perhaps might be pushing this to a greater degree and which ones are basically not pursuing it in any way whatsoever?  

[00:11:02]
>> Well I think to those countries that have qualification frameworks, there's usually, and a lot do, in Europe and South Africa, increasingly in Asia, there's often something about global competency.  But again, stating is as a goal and actually integrating it into the curriculum and measuring it are two different issues.  I know that the Dutch have incorporated it into their accreditation system.  It's the Dutch-Flemish joint accreditation body.  And the Australians are pretty serious about global competency and assessment.  Those are two examples, there may be others out there that are not on my screen.  

[00:11:52]
>> Okay I mean I guess when I'm thinking about issues of the pursuit of this agenda, the one thing that sort of just popped to mind is I guess a disciplinary agenda with some disciplines or fields, professions perhaps, pursuing it more strongly than others.  This goes back to your comment about the strong role of faculty in sometimes general education.  But are there disciplinary sort of dimensions to this agenda?  

[00:12:28]
>> Well there are disciplines that are inherently global or internationally focused, geography of course is one of them, international relations, anything comparative.  Certainly business has become much more globally focused and indeed there are accreditation requirements, there are some very specific guidelines about the content of the curriculum.  But I think the challenge is with the disciplines that are not necessarily inherently global and trying to teach them in a more global, with a more global perspective using examples from other cultures and just kind of enlarging the framework through non-U.S. sources or, for example, how can you teach American history looking from the outside in and not just having U.S. sources with a U.S. focus?  
[00:13:36]
So I think that's the challenge in the disciplines.  There's tremendous variation.  

[00:13:44]
>> Okay that's right.  In the end, what are the two or three perhaps best things that a university or college can do to ensure its students are on the path to becoming more capable global learners?  

[00:14:01]
>> Well for a long time we assumed that if you sent a student abroad that equated to being a global learner and more and more faculty and institutions are realizing that simply isn't the case.  One, you don't know about what they're learning in a global sense, maybe they're learning math or physics or business but unless you're being very intentional about what they're learning in terms of intercultural or global competence you simply don't know.  There's also research that shows that some students go abroad and simply don't acquire global competence because they're hanging out with students from their own country or they're simply having their prejudices reinforced.  So the first rule then would be pay attention to the campus and the curriculum.  Internationalization at home is where global competence is going to be acquired by most students who never have the opportunity to study abroad, which is the vast majority of students around the globe, so that's the first area and the most important, what are you doing in the curriculum?  
[00:15:24]
What's your campus like, life like and that includes also international students.  And then the second best things a university can do is provide opportunities for the faculty to be as globally oriented as possible, opportunities to expand their teaching to have, in an international way to have collaborations with colleagues abroad to do internationally focused research so that means funding and faculty development, workshops on what does it mean to have, what is global competence?  Or plane tickets to do different kinds of research.  

[00:16:19]
>> Okay any sort of final things with respect to, and I think about that last couple of recommendations, are there any sort of bubbling up, emerging sort of innovations on this front that are being trialed or test bedded on any institutions that are worth taking note of?  

[00:16:44]
>> Well it's hard to think of singling out a particular institution but from my experience working with institutions I think this attention to the faculty and thinking of internationalization, not so much as a cost center, as an entrepreneurial exercise.  Too often internationalization or global anything is equated with international students and the income thereof but thinking about it as an integral part, an academic program and a key to quality.  That's the mindset that distinguishes the institutions that are really moving successfully towards global competence.  

[00:17:32]
>> That's a great point to end off on, so thank you very much for listening everybody and we appreciate it very much.  

[00:17:39]
>> Well it was a pleasure to chat with you, Kris, as always.  

[00:17:42]
>> Okay thanks.  Bye bye.  

[00:17:43]
>> Bye bye.  