Production Transcript for John Hepburn Podcast - Week 1.MP3




[00:00:00]
>> Nice to meet you today, John.  

[00:00:02]
>> Great to meet you.  

[00:00:03]
>> And it's nice to be back at UBC, a place that's changed a lot since I last was based here in the 1980's.  

[00:00:11]
>> It's changed a lot.  I mean I moved here 12 years ago and it's changed a lot in the 12 years I've been here so yeah, it's changing rapidly.  

[00:00:17]
>> As I explained a little bit earlier, the focus of this course is trying to sort of bring to life the ideas about how universities are globalizing themselves in this particular class. So I'm curious about how your international strategic plan was published in 2011. So where do things stand now?  And the students in this course will have had a chance to look at the report and look at some other media, sort of stories about UBC and some speeches by the President.  So where does the international strategy plan stand right now?  

[00:00:57]
>> What's happening is we're in a transition period internationally and that's because the executive director of our international office unfortunately left UBC to go be in charge of the Cambridge Trust, she's British herself, so for her it was a wonderful opportunity.  We're hiring a new executive director and we've reconfigured the position to give it more authority and more responsibility.  And in fact one of the first duties of the new executive director will be to take a look at our international strategy and refresh it.  I think that the international strategy as it's currently published is, it's aspirational.  It does set some priorities but it's a little vague on specifics so we'd like to get a bit more specific about what constitutes success, what we're going to measure?  How we can tell we're making progress?  And by doing that also defining what areas we think are important to make progress in.  

[00:01:58]
>> Yeah I noticed that unlike many international strategies, yours did have some benchmarks in it.  

[00:02:03]
>> It did and some of those benchmarks we're working towards achieving and some of those I think we need to reevaluate, either to get more ambitious or more realistic, depending on your point of view.  And we're going to, we're unlikely to change the regions of focus that were identified in the plan.  We talked about these being regions of focus for a three to five year period and so we're only a couple of years in.  We're making great progress and we still need to make more progress but I think we're going to start evaluating whether we need to pay attention to places like Brazil and so on and so forth.  And now that we have experienced being a bit more systematic in our international engagement, what it would mean to, how we would decide whether Brazil would be a great country, and I'm just using that as a standard example of where a lot of universities are currently interested.  

[00:02:55]
>> Thinking back since sort of 2010, 2011 through to now, have there been any particular sort of successes or unexpected hurdles that have arisen, I mean apart from some leadership changes with respect to your office?  

[00:03:12]
>> That's right.  I think that the, and unexpected would be too strong a term, the bureaucracy in India has been a challenge.  We established an office in Delhi, that was quite difficult, getting all the approvals in place for that.  We've had a great deal of success, I think in China, not only our profile but the level of sort of higher-level partnership has increased.  We've always been very engaged in China but in sort of a typical faculty-driven way.  Now we're trying to put pieces together and be more strategic.  The main success, and I suppose predictably, would be in Europe.  And that's simply because the European universities behave like North American universities and so we have opened up some quite strong strategic partnerships particularly with Germany.  

[00:03:59]
>> Oh okay.  

[00:04:00]
>> And so there've been real successes.  And I think in all three regions that we identified you can see definite progress but you know there's still work to be done.  

[00:04:09]
>> Running through the international strategic plan, it's clear that there are some sort of underlying principles and values associated with the institution and perhaps the leadership at the time that the report was sort of finalized.  

[00:04:25]
>> Right.  

[00:04:25]
>> I think you can just shed a little more light than is evident in the plan on the underlying values that are shaping UBC's internationalization strategy.  So what are they?  Where do they come from?  Are there key sort of fingerprints, if you will, behind these principles and values?  And in the development of the plan were there any important debates that might be worth knowing about from a student's perspective?  

[00:04:54]
>> Yeah.  I think that, I mean, there's so many levels of international engagement that all the way from recruiting you know high fee-paying undergraduate international students and professional program graduate students on through to internationalizing our curriculum, making our own Canadian-born students aware of the world around them or even our Diaspora students who have a very limited viewpoint of their, you know, their parents or their own birth country, on through to research partnerships.  So trying to come up with a unifying “what's more important than what” is impossible at a university.  However we decided that we would focus on partnership and partnership-building and there had to be a mutual benefit.  You know if we're going to create partnerships in India, you can do that by simply going in and doing you know medical research.  In India there's lot of disease, there's lots of public health threats in India and so you can treat India as a giant laboratory and that's useful work.  
[00:05:59]
And you know the benefit for India is real in a sense.  But we decided that we needed to work with Indian research partners and try and develop the partnerships there, which is challenging because the Indian universities and research institutions by and large don't operate at the same level we do.  And so that means you have to be selective and you have to decide, okay, where is there actually a benefit where there's something to be offered from their side and we also have something to offer and it's worth doing it.  So in other words we don't want to be engaged in partnerships for the sake of engaging in partnerships.  The second thing is we're a university and so it has to be driven by faculty and student interest.  There's no point with great fanfare signing an MOU in a part of the world that nobody has any interest in, right, and that we have no expertise.  And so that led us to you know what was defined as very regions of focus where we think we do have potential for partnerships, where we do have engagement and interest and where we do have expertise.  
[00:06:59]
So then one of the things you discover, and I've had you know the joy and the torment of also doing a research strategy.  And of course at a university the two things that will excite interest you know after you deal with teaching modes and space allocation are international engagements and research.  And as long as you tell everybody that their favorite country, partner, research topic is wonderful and has a strategic interest in the university, everybody is happy.  But as soon as you say that, you know, we think this area of research is to us more important, or that area of research or that this country is more important to us than that country, well then of course you're annoying people.  And so with our internationalization strategy we talk about Africa but we admit that we really have very little expertise on Africa.  We have lots of people engaged on Africa but you know as a university we don't have a lot of expertise.  And so we said Africa is an interest to us but it's not a strategic interest.  That, of course, amongst the students who all think that we should be devoting endless attention to Africa, thought that that was a horrible thing to say.  
[00:08:05]
The people who were interested in Latin America thought that it was outrageous that we weren't focusing attention strategically on Brazil or Mexico, again the same reason that yes, we have people who are engaged there.  We have students from there.  But you know compared to the level of engagement and expertise we have on a country like China, there's no comparison.  And so now you're telling people who love a certain part of the world that, well, you're not quite as important to us as this part of the world.  And of course at a university you have to love all your children equally and so.  

[00:08:39]
>> I mean just to flesh out one little aspect of it, clearly if you read the report there is a geographical sort of, you delineate a footprint about what kind of footprint UBC is ideally going to have.  Again though you're not suggesting you're not going to deal with Africa.  

[00:08:56]
>> Of course not.  

[00:08:57]
>> But what about at other universities there are sometimes very clear strategies to diversify revenue.  I mean MIT has the revenue diversification strategy and in it they talk about the role of internationalization in revenue diversification.  Other universities are very clear that they'll spend a lot of money to go to regions where there is no money to be made, in fact they'll probably lose a lot of money but they will build capacity, produce new forms of knowledge—-so, high societal impact, no economic return.  

[00:09:29]
>> Yeah.  

[00:09:29]
>> Is it very clear what UBC's strategy is vis a vis capacity-building or revenue diversification or sort of that debate?  

[00:09:41]
>> So let me put it in the context of a real debate which is: revenue diversification means bringing in international students who pay much higher fees then Canadian students do.  We want to do that and we need to do that because let's face it, the government grants aren't going up and the tuition is regulated in Canada and so our only source of increased revenue, or a major source of increased revenue, is the international student so we have to do that for sustainability reasons.  So once you decide that, then you could say well fine, then we don't care where the students come from.  Just you know we just need students who are willing to pay fees.  We don't care what they take just so long as they show up and pay high fees.  We don't care if they're successful as long as they stick around long enough to pay us a lot of money.  We don't want to do that and in fact it would be easier to do that.  It would be easier to approve all our students from Northeast Asia and some universities do.  We want to bring in international students also because they diversify the campus.  They have things to teach us but they're not going to teach us much if they all come from northeast Asia.  
[00:10:44]
So we would like students to come from North America.  We would like students to come from Africa.  We would like students to come from other parts of the world.  And so you have to grow the student body at the same time as diversify the student body and so it's between goals.  We're also, getting back to Africa, we've launched, supported by the Master Card foundation, we've launched a program, and we’ve promised the Master Card foundation, that we're going to bring in 100 poor students, I mean very poor students from sub-Saharan Africa and so we're getting money from Master Card Foundation to support this because this is going to be a very complex and expensive enterprise.  We want these students to be successful and so we won't make a dime off this, but it will take a lot of time and effort, because we think it's the right thing to do.  

[00:11:25]
>> The next is a question about context and all higher education institutions are embedded in different political contexts, socio-demographic contexts, some economic contexts.  I grew up in Vancouver for the most part and did a couple of degrees here.  Vancouver has changed a lot as well, as has British Columbia, as has Canada.  

[00:11:49]
>> Right.  

[00:11:49]
>> So one question I have is how have the contexts at different levels in which UBC is embedded shaped your university’s internationalization strategy?  Here we can think about the city scale, the region scale, the provincial scale, the fact that you're a Canadian institution, higher education, or even embedded again in the broader Pacific Rim.  

[00:12:12]
>> Right.  

[00:12:13]
>> Is there one level or scale if you will that is more important than others in sort of shaping the internationalization strategy in particular?  

[00:12:23]
>> I think, I mean first of all as with any Canadian, I mean Canada is a small country, and so any Canadian university has to internationalize for its research.  

[00:12:35]
>> Yeah.  

[00:12:36]
>> And so nearly half of our research papers have international coauthors and that's fairly typical of major Canadian universities and also of major French universities or British universities.  The world's a big place and expertise is everywhere.  Our location is actually quite important to international thinking and that's an obvious thing.  We're on the west coast.  We face Asia.  We're divided from the rest of the continent by a you know series of mountain ranges and so there's a west coast way of thinking, not just in Canada but also in the United States that tends to look towards Asia more than towards Europe.  And then of course changes you alluded to in Vancouver.  Vancouver is very much a city of immigrants and the immigrants now come essentially entirely from Asia.  Our former Vice President used to refer to student population as being lumpily diverse by which he meant that the majority of our students were born outside of Canada, even the ones carrying Canadian passports.  Their mother tongue is something other than English.  
[00:13:38]
English is a minority language as mother tongue on this campus.  But they come from a relatively limited number of Asian countries.  They're Chinese and Chinese Diaspora.  They're South Asian, Southeast Asian.  You know it's an Asian student mix.  Vancouver has become a very Asian city.  Now historically UBC has always looked towards Asia academically as well.  We have a long history of Asian studies, looking originally, actually studied in Japan but you know great depth of expertise on China and other parts of Asia, Korea.  And so all of that you know when you start thinking about okay well where should we focus attention internationally?  Well you're going to build on strength.  And so Asia becomes the natural.  The faculty members at UBC, I think there'd be very few faculty members who didn't spend some of their formative years outside of Canada.  

[00:14:30]
>> Yes.  

[00:14:30]
>> That's perfectly normal.  Again Canada is a small country so you know we just had an inherently international focus and specifically because of the local community and where we're located in the world, it's a strong Pacific Rim and Asian focus.  

[00:14:45]
>> So again that is reflected of the nature of the city and also intuitively Canada, one of the highest proportions of immigrants per capita.  

[00:14:55]
>> Yeah especially in the major cities of Toronto and Vancouver where I think in both cities half the population was born outside Canada.  

[00:15:03]
>> Yeah okay and then finally I'll wrap it up here, it's always hard to cement questions about where UBC would be in five or 10 or 15 years, again the institution has changed a lot when I think about it when I arrived here in 1979 and sort of left here in the mid 80's, it’s a sea change, change on a number of levels from the physical campus, through to the nature of the students, through to the food on offer, etcetera.  Where will UBC likely be in five or 10 or 15 years with respect to the sort of internationalization agenda?  

[00:15:42]
>> Well of course by definition you can't know where we will be.  I can tell you where we'd like to be.  We would like to be one of the recognized world centers and not just Canadian centers but world centers for the understanding of East Asia in particular, China specifically and its relationship with the rest of the world.  I mean having a body of expertise and having loads of people who are fluent Mandarin speakers outside of China and outside of China's political influence orbit is enormously important for providing a viewpoint on China that's well-informed but is independent.  I think that's our duty.  Also it provides a means of interpreting China in a positive sense, not in just some paranoid sense.  You know, “what’s the value of the renminbi, and is it being manipulated?,” to the rest of North America.  So that's one place I'd like to be.  I'd like to have an obvious much stronger interaction students, a diverse international student body at both the undergraduate and the graduate level, stronger research partnerships around the world.  
[00:16:48]
I mean that's just part of building a great university.  And you know have strategic partnerships.  Where we won't be, at least in our current thinking, is having campuses abroad.  We don't think that's the way to proceed.  We think that we're better off building things in partnership with foreign partners rather than trying to establish UBC Malaysia, etcetera, etcetera.  

[00:17:10]
>> Yeah, that's great.  So thank you very much for your input and I'm sure the students will learn a lot in engaging with both the ideas and issues that you've raised here but also in relation to the sort of background documents you've kindly supplied or that we've been able to source.  

[00:17:29]
>> Great.  

[00:17:29]
>> So thank you very much.  

[00:17:30]
>> Okay.  Thank you.  