Production Transcript for Simon Marginson defines global competency.mp3




[00:00:00]
>> How do you see this idea, this idea of global competence?  Can you just give me your thoughts on that?  

[00:00:08]
>> I don't like the term "global citizen".  I think that's, coexists in the wrong world.  It's misleading in the sense that there's no global state and national citizenship only really has meaning in, in the context of states where, where it involves the exercise and rights and responsibilities within a defined polity.  But the notion of global competence I think is, you know, the more, is in some ways more nebulous, but it's perhaps still useful.  I would say that's, that's the topic for a full interview of its own.  I think that the chief strategic need is to be aware and open to the other while at the same time being communicative and bringing forward your own ideas, your own interests, your own strategies.  
[00:01:08]
It's that sort of double movement of being open and aware and willing to change and willing to learn, and at the same time being effective in communication, in advocacy, in self-efficacy.  So, it's that ability, really, in a two-way communicative flow and one where you're prepared, if you like, to change and develop in that process.  And I think that those are the essential things that underlie any more specific description of global competence.  I mean, capacity in languages clearly assists you in understanding the other and communicating with the other and being able to see the world through more than one eyes, eye at the same time.  So, capacity in languages is an important competence within the larger heading of, you know, global competence.  The capacity, I think, to move across not only two cultures which are close, like from English-speaking countries to western Europe, but also to cultures which are, which have a more distant origin and are less familiar, like those in Africa or east Asia.  
[00:02:18]
And I think that willingness to, to make those imaginative leaps and to learn across distance is now part of global competence.  The flexibility and willingness to move, to relocate, to enter into different spaces, you can't do it all from, on the desktop, but your willingness to go and leave and work in, you know, outside your own environment and change your environment and become mobile in that sense, I think that's an important aspect of global competence.  I don't know, Susan, that's probably not exhausted it but it seems to me they're, they're some of the salient elements but I think it's that, that kind of core attitude that you're essentially willing to learn from others and that you're willing to embrace a change in yourself and that you don't see your own culture as inherently superior, or the necessary starting point for everything else or the framework through which you interpret things, the prism through which you look, that you try and look through other prisms and understand what that means.  

[00:03:28]
>> I think that's very helpful and to some extent, what you said I think is in line, rather, with the thoughts of people like Ulrich Beck who talked about a kind of methodology, a way of thinking about oneself in relation to others.  