Production Transcript for Simon Marginson Q&A.mp3




[00:00:02]
>> I’d like your view on the single most important dynamic that has resulted in national governments pursuing an explicit policy of globalizing higher education.  I'm wondering if you could shed some light on that problematic?  

[00:00:15]
>> I think there are two conjunct elements here.  One is the condition of the other.  The first element is-- was a communicative globalization which you can, I think, neatly date with the advent of the internet at the beginning of the 1990s.  I mean, that has fundamentally changed human relations in all kinds of ways, in ways I think we haven't fully understood or got to grips with partly because we take the existence of the internet and what it does for granted.  But, you know, it's interesting to think back to the world of the 1970s and 1980s when communication was so largely by mail. What a different kind of environment that was, in government, business, and higher education!  Now, the advent of the internet and a kind of worldwide communicative culture has brought worldwide elites into conjunction with each other much more closely.  And higher education that's top end anyway, it's about elite formation and, you know, what happens to the families of elites and so on.  
[00:01:19]
And by bringing elites more closely into communication in conjunction with each other, the higher education institutions in which they are educated were also brought into conjunction with each other.  So, that creates an atmosphere where all kinds of international developments in higher education and research and science became more plausible, more feasible, more desirable to people.  Then, the second factor which enters more directly into the question of developmental states and their relationship with higher education is that-- is the way in which higher education, and particularly research and science and its role in innovation, in industrial innovation and competition, and in innovation, have become central to developmental strategies of states in a way they weren't before.  And that may well be related to community globalization.  It's also related to the growing importance of knowledge-intensive production and knowledge-intensive labor in, you know, in all spheres in modern economies.  But certainly the global competition state has made universities, university rankings, university research performance, and the attractiveness of universities distant to students in other countries central to its thinking in a way that it didn't before.  
[00:02:33]
I mean, the global competition state, of course, is not new.  We can go back to the 19th century, I think, to point to the origins of the states which looked globally to-- at their competitors and what they were doing and sort of imitated and improved on their competitiveness, and seek a competitive advantage.  What's new is that, well, industrial capacity, economic growth, and military capacity, and mostly technology, especially were always part of that equation.  There has been a more general, I think, embrace of science and technology as central to competitiveness in this period.  And that's for better— for good or for ill made universities and students in universities an important part of the strategic global game.  

[00:03:17]
>> The element of trade, you-- do you kind of see that as the kind of trade in science and technology that then comes with this new manifestation of the global that you've identified?  

[00:03:32]
>> Well, I think that process of everyone being brought more closely together, of course, has enhanced the, you know, global markets and they were really for all-- and their role in relation to national economies and made borders more porous economically and increased the weight of trade.  And that's been one of the things which has happened, perhaps more in a more accelerated fashion since 1990, since community globalization began.  But it's again, it's a continuation of trends in the last 200 years or so, the trend to global trade, the trend to the growth in foreign investment across borders and so on.  Now, higher education connects with that process in all kinds of ways, mostly indirectly in the sense that it produces people with skills who take part in global trade and engage in entrepreneurship, but it also produces knowledge which is-- which enters into production and enters into the process of distribution of production in industries across different country sites.  

[00:04:26]
>> So, if you look at the different countries, I mean, you study different countries, Simon, and their higher education systems.  And I'm wondering if you can actually see differences, distinct differences across those countries?  For instance, the United States versus the UK, versus Australia, versus Russia, or China.  I mean, is there divergences or convergences across the HE sector because of these dynamics?  

[00:04:58]
>> I'd point to several ways in which we can think about differences here, between, say, the major English-speaking countries and they're not the same as each other, and Western Europe, and Russia, and China, and East Asia, and so on, India.  And we can of course we now talk of Brazil, and we can talk about a number of other major players in-- I mean, the G20 concept, I think, has got more legs than it would have had 15 years ago.  There are more players in the game, not just the conventional BRICS, but a number of other emerging countries and, you know, countries like Korea which is exceptionally dynamic even if they're only medium-sized, and so on. Yes, I think, you know, they all exhibit some specificity about the way which globalization impacts them in higher education research and the way in which they contribute to globalization in higher education research. There’s a number of criteria we can bring to bear on these national differences.  One is the role of the state itself.  And what you notice is that in East Asia, for example, the state strategy in higher education in knowledge and science is much more explicit, much more directional.  
[00:06:08]
It bears more heavily on what happens, I think, more immediately and directly, and helps to explain the extraordinary dynamism and growth, chiefly of research science and of student numbers in higher education in countries like China, Taiwan, Korea, and Singapore.  And in the case of what I call the Westminster countries, countries where the treasury is particularly strong, where there is a high degree of centralization in government, like New Zealand, Australia, and particularly the UK, the sort of mother country of that mode of state, you do see a more implicit directional state, but quite a strong state presence nonetheless.  For example, you take the UK and then its export industry in education, which is an important dynamic element in the national economy.  It-- UK is, you know, the second largest provider of places for international students and the largest commercial provider, followed by Australia.  
[00:07:08]
You know, the UK assists its export effort by a very well-funded competent outfit called the British Council, which smooths the way in many respects for international relations with British universities across the world.  You know, it brings to bear this highly competent state, adjunct in-- which has got a sort of semipublic status, you know, in support of state effort.  In the US, of course, national government is less directly involved in many things.  The country’s more decentralized.  The states play a larger role than they do in most countries, even those with federal systems.  And individual institutions in higher education, the leading ones, have a great deal of autonomy.  But there's an impressive degree of implicit coordination about the way in which American universities operate offshore, and the apparatus of organizations like the American Council on Education that operate out of Dupont Circle in Washington lock in with the institutions and lock in with government, generally speaking, with some tensions.  
[00:08:10]
As in a number of other countries, there are tensions between America's internationalizing stance in the university sector and its-- and sometimes their more security-conscious and more protectionist attitude, an attitude which may restrict mobility of incoming students from some countries for example, from time to time, for foreign policy reasons.  But, you know, different states, different state approaches, some states are clearly more aggressive, more upfront, more directional, more embracing about their approach.  Other states, more inclined to step back and leave things to institutions with still more implicit forms of coordination.  Then, there's the question of the economics of globalization in higher education.  We, again, you see quite substantial variations with the British and the Australian, New Zealand approach being out and out commercial, seeking to recruit particularly first degree and coursework master's students on a full-fee paying basis.  UK also focuses on doctoral students as well.  
[00:09:12]
The others tend to focus largely on the first-degrees and taught master's degrees.  But predominantly, a commercial rather than foreign aid-driven or foreign cooperation-driven approach to international students.  The US is much more concerned about foreign policy objectives and also about recruiting talent at the top end, getting good quality doctoral students from all over the world which are-- and foreign students have made an immense contribution to the American knowledge economy at that top end of talent.  And because of-- and it's been a very successful policy for the US, but there are some signs now of a more commercial approach emerging, with an attempt to build some institutions’ financial position by recruiting first-degree students in numbers.  But still though, predominantly, I think the American approach is not, you know, a fully commercial approach.  Then you go to Europe and you see in Germany or as you do also in Japan and Asia, a more foreign-- again, a more foreign policy and international cooperation-driven approach without a commercial arm, and without an attempt to make money out of foreign students, and with a good deal of explicit subsidization of international student exchanges, especially in Japan.  
[00:10:27]
You will see also signs of a commercial market emerging in the master's programs in Western Europe that are being taught in English.  And again in Asia, in China, in Singapore, in Malaysia, Hong Kong, you see more directly-commercial approach is growing in especially at the coursework master's level.  And overlaying all of this though is the international doctoral market which is sort of scholarship-driven rather than fee- or finance-driven, and which is an important-- but it's also an important arena of competition for talent, with countries seeking to attract, you know, the best-quality foreign students into their PhD programs.  

[00:11:04]
>> And you certainly see that with Europe's, you know, Erasmus Mundus and Erasmus Doctoral orientation.  So, can I move you on to the question now of Saskia Sassen's argument about--  

[00:11:19]
>> Yes.  

[00:11:19]
>> -- globalization and-- I mean, we've been looking at what seemed to be kind of quite national strategies, but her argument is that globalization sets up denationalizing dynamics in national context.  What do you think of that argument?  

[00:11:35]
>> Yeah, I think this is where the discussion is very interesting, 'cause it's-- the whole relation between the nation and the global I think is an open question and in many respects an evolving one, and certainly one which is subject to many different interpretations as well.  And people's normative position tends to, on the degree to which they, if you like, normalize the nation, I think, you know, has a considerable impact in the way they interpret this problem because it's not one you can readily settle empirically.  I mean, there are signs of the dissolution of nations.  There are signs of the strengthening of nations in the global environment.  There are signs of the global becoming qualitatively more important.  But it's also relatively easy to say that things haven't changed very much.  And those different stances have run across the literature really extensively in the last 20 years.  I mean, the point-- I think Sassen's point is quite a good one.  The notion that within national frameworks, that a process of change is occurring, which is a result of nations operating in a global setting in which certain flows and certain effects are essentially unstoppable.  
[00:12:50]
And I think that what we don't see is any sign of the deconstruction of the nation as a political entity.  There's no alternative really.  There is no global political entity.  There's no global state.  There's no-- And multilateralism’s always been a week reed, really, in terms of its capacity to operate as a political form and tends to fly apart very-- you know, under pressure very quickly.  It's not necessary.  It's not inevitable.  It hasn't-- Doesn't have the same sense of inevitability that the nation has in people's minds.  So, no real sign that the nation as a political entity is dissolving, but the point I would make though is-- and somewhat different I think to Sassen's point is that alongside the way in which in some respect the nation is deauthorized within national settings, and that particularly applies to weaker and medium nations, you also see the rise of global systems, global systems which cut across all nations or contain all nations.  
[00:13:55]
And I think those are qualitatively more important than they were.  I mean, like global communications, the global knowledge system.  We essentially have one world library through the internet and through academic literature.  It's an English-language monopoly.  That's problematic and exclusive but it's at the same time, it's held in common, and it's I think qualitatively an advance in terms of our capacity to share a larger body of information with each other and talk to each other intelligently. So-- then that's just knowledge, the knowledge system with its linguistic inclusions and exclusions.  But these-- I mean, while I don't think the training environment has changed a lot, I think intellectually, you know, we're much more together than we were.  So, the advent of world systems, I think, has to be considered alongside the process of denationalization within national settings and the continuing salience of the nation-state as a form.  And to me, that's an unstable mix, you know?  
[00:14:57]
You’ve got the continuing strength of the nation-state, at the same time it's being undermined, with perhaps only a few very strong nation-states able to play an unequivocal role as nation-states, where to some extent at times, if they wish, they can turn their back on the global environment, they’re strong enough to do that.  But only to a degree, and I think it's become extremely difficult for nation-states to run a kind of global exclusion line, the sort of approach that Russia took, say, in the Soviet period, you know, where they shut the rest of the world out.  It drew information knowledge from the rest of the world into its own system but it didn't put any of its own signs out into the general environment.  Now, Russia continues to do that to some extent, and pays the price 'cause I think in this environment, unless you engage in a two-way flow, you're not really effective in being able to use knowledge and information coming in from other countries.  And Russia's scientific output is going down.  It's going to continue to lose talented people across borders.  
[00:15:57]
And, you know, this sort of policy of “science and technology in one country” no longer works, and I think that's a change.  And that's one of the things that's happened, in Sassen's terms, you know, that the capacity of an individual country's educational science system to adopt an autarchic or closed stance is disappearing, in that sense, denationalization within the national framework.  

[00:16:24]
>> So to some extent, the denationalizing or, in other words, units within the national setting being more globally oriented, which that’s classically the way the university always has been, is almost a condition for survival of that nation, and of the knowledge of that nation, would you say?  

[00:16:43]
>> Yes, that's right.  That's ends, you know?  There's lots of paradoxes here but, yes, nations need to be globally engaged.  They need to be globally aware.  They need to be globally proactive.  I think that the classic successful stance, the one that China, I think, has been able to develop very effectively in its internationalization strategy, is to be engaged and open to a degree, at the same time, to retain a strong sense of your own identity, your own project.  In some ways, I think countries which have a very strong linguistic-cultural set of their own and at the same time are very adept in global English are particularly world-class strategically. I think, for example Finland, you know, or Korea is another example, although their English-language competence is not as strong as in Finland.  And I think China by putting immense resources and effort into developing English-language teaching and creating a situation where now people under 30 are generally fluent in English, and of course until recently English was a compulsory part of the-- of the end-of-school examination.  
[00:17:51]
So that English language skills, at least the ability to read, were universalizing in China, although that's interestingly enough just been withdrawn, that English language is no longer compulsory, which may have some interesting effects in terms of China's capacity longer-term to be internationally effective.  

[00:18:07]
>> Well, that's pretty interesting.  Can I take you to perhaps the last question, and your views about the biggest threat facing those countries that have globalized their higher education systems the most?  

[00:18:22]
>> It's difficult to be categorical of that biggest threat.  I think if different countries are in different strategic positions, then they have different problems.  I suppose, yeah, you could point to a dependency, that possibility that there are too many eggs in the internationalization basket, as a danger and that sort of, you know, in that sense-- that parallels nations being overly dependent on foreign trade.  But some nations have no choice.  I mean, like Singapore.  I mean, it has to be overly dependent on foreign trade because it hasn’t got a domestic market capacity.  It's only five million people.  So, I mean, unless it’s engaged heavily in foreign trade, it’s not really a player.  So-- And I think it's the same in internationalization of higher ed too.  I mean that the smaller countries are very dependent on internationalization.  They need to join themselves to the world knowledge system, to the world research and science system, the world circuit of universities, and to some extent work that system, that world system rather than just the national system to be able to operate.  
[00:19:29]
And if they, you know, that-- well, yes, the fact that it could all close up a bit, internationalization could become less effective as a strategy, yes, that's possible in a number of ways, they could, you know, national conflict for example could drive that kind of change.  And the countries here which are highly internationalized might then be disadvantaged.  That's true, but they really don't have much choice.  They have to go that way.  I think the danger is, perhaps, greater for those countries that are globalizing their systems at least, I mean, they-- I think that there we can point to more definite negatives.  Anyone who's not particularly effectively globally engaged is really not in the main game in many ways in the university and science world.  So, even if the-- and again, I'd sort of, you know, repeat the example of Russia.  I think Russia is a major country with great capacity and, you know, intrinsic strength in its population, especially in the STEM disciplines continues to, you know, impress, its capacity to produce advanced mathematicians and so on in great numbers.  
[00:20:34]
And, you know, highly educated in terms of its participation, right, at tertiary level and it's especially-- again in, you know, its number of engineers and technologists.  And yet, Russia is not-- doesn't benchmark internationally effectively.  It's not very aware of what happens in the rest of the world.  It is not exchanging knowledge in the same way that most large developed countries are.  And it's really becoming more and more insular and more and more, relative to the rest of the world, and less and less competent in scientific terms, which is quite an extraordinary change from the last-- let's say 30 years ago.  And that's because they do not have a commitment to internalization as a strategy in the university sector.  And much of their research which is produced is produced in national circuits and national stakeholders in the nation, and is published in Russian but not in English so it can't be obtained outside the country.  And they still have some security consciousness of the old kind, which is rather defensiveness and an unwillingness to push knowledge out to the rest of the world in case it might be strategically useful to the competition.  
[00:21:41]
I think those attitudes are obsolete.  And, you know, you could say, you know, look, that’s a more extreme example but there are other cases too where companies are perhaps not sufficiently internationalized in their outlook and knowledge.  And I think that while you could probably envision a world where there'd be less student flows than there currently are, or that whereas students flows had stopped growing, it's hard to imagine a world where knowledge would stop becoming more and more globalized.  So, I think that's where community globalization really is part of the explanation, you know, that that's an irreversible trend.  And unless someone starts shutting down the Internet or succeeds in technology, a technology which enables say, if you like, a nationally-bordered type of Internet to develop, I think that, you know, the-- in some respects, internationalization is a done deal.  And it's more dangerous to be under-internationalized than to be over-internationalized.  

[00:22:33]
>> So, if we go to the question then of global markets, and I think if I'm right, you have actually-- and that higher education is being completely commodified.  I mean, you opposed that view, don't you, or you put a counterview?  And I'm wondering A, if I have understood correctly your argument? What your argument is essentially, that this is not the case.  

[00:22:55]
>> Well, I mean, higher education is and isn't a global market.  I mean, it's-- it can be understood in a loose metaphorical sense as a market, if you, in the way that which the American higher education is customarily described as a market, because there's competition between institutions for students and, to some extent, for revenues.  And some of the transactions or economic transactions involve-- some involve prices.  And clearly, you know, you can identify business-like behavior within institutions in some respects, especially in, you know, the side of efficiency or human resource management.  But I think that's only a loose metaphorical sense in being-- it's perhaps on the-- we, perhaps, use the market as a metaphor because market-like thinking is so strong in the culture at present, and the business form is so paradigmatic as a form of modern organization, rather than, say, a bureaucracy as it might have been a hundred years ago.  
[00:23:56]
I think-- and if you look at it in strictly economic terms where, you know, you look to the existence of a profit motif and profit-maximization behavior, you look at market share-maximization behavior as one of the elements.  And you look at the willingness, if you like, to vacate the field of production and move into another field of production if that's what the logic of capital tells you to do.  I don't think in that respect higher education is like a market.  I mean, it's generally and it's certainly the research universities are not primarily driven by profit.  They are driven by the desire for status, perhaps for social power.  Institutional reputation is an important part of their thinking.  But revenues are really only a means to those ends rather than anything themselves.  There's a more directly commercial market at the other end of the status ladder.  You see for-profit institutions and you see even public-sector mass education providers behaving in a direct-- in terms of a direct competition for students and student revenues in a way which is more market-like in a classic economic sense.  
[00:25:01]
But, I mean, I think that Pierre Bourdieu’s formulation I think holds, that, you know, you can understand a market not only, you know, the market in art that he talked about in the field of artistic production, but also the market in education as one which is in fact riven between two poles, one of which is an elite pole of elite institutions, which are primarily culturally defined, have a social role of importance, are engaged in a prestige competition, but not necessarily in an economic competition as such.  But they then nevertheless hold significant economic resources as one of the main symbolic stakes by which they exercise their power.  And at the other end, you see volume building, in the case of education, mass education, more commercially-driven whether it's government-provided or it's private sector-provided with, I must say, the private sector playing an increasing role in this period.  

[00:25:56]
>> So, almost the Polanyi point too, that in fact you can't commodify something like knowledge labor, and this is a particular kind of knowledge labor actually, isn’t it, in the higher education sector?  

[00:26:11]
>> Absolutely.  Yeah, it's a classic public good, knowledge.  I mean, you can privatize it to a degree.  But it doesn't hold. When someone develops a new idea or a new artifact, a knowledge-intensive artifact, they can gain an advantage from that in the first instance but once it goes out there, once it becomes public and imitatable, the capacity to control it economically is lost.  And, you know, the mathematical theorem is still, you know, useful regardless of the number of times it's been used before.  So, knowledge is a public good, as Stiglitz in particular pointed out.  And I think won a Nobel Prize for saying so.  And so, that the more that knowledge is in play, the more that the knowledge and culture factor are central to higher education, the less it looks like a conventional market.  So, it's the top end of the-- of the hierarchy, it’s the research universities which look least like a classic market.  Although they e—ngage there is no doubt they are involved-- engaged in competition.  And often I think when people are saying market, they just mean competition.  
[00:27:11]
Now, competition runs up and down the sector, and at all levels at the same time there's significant cooperation as well, as there is in much human relations, you know, by competition and cooperation are interplaying.  And particularly in international education, particularly cross-border stuff, arguably the cooperative element may overshadow the competitive element in many respects.  

[00:27:37]
>> Your reflections I think, and the important reflections for the participants on the MOOC, is to not find yourself just using words like privatization, competition, marketization, and so on as being all the one thing.  They are very different kinds of processes.  And what we need to do is to understand them as distinctly different processes.  So, institutions that compete with each other is quite different to, you know, talking about processes of commodification.  They are very different kinds of processes.  

[00:28:11]
>> It’s funny, isn’t it, Susan, because the globalization discussion I think has been made more complex as it's gone along and we’re no longer in a sort of mid 1990s globalization discussion but with-- it's a much more nuanced one now, the notion that the nation-state is going to disappear in the foreseeable future, for example, is, that kind of rather normative notion has been taken off the table.  And so, we're dealing with things in a much more complex manner.  But the privatization, marketization, commodification discussion is still a bit binary, and as to why they're-- it's still very normatively driven, people say yes or no.  I like it, I don't like it.  I'm an entrepreneur.  I'm a public good person, you know?  It's one or the other.  And you are absolutely right.  I think that we need to break down these terms and look much more closely at them and make the whole discussion more complicated.  I mean, privatization is not the same as the development of commodity forms.  I mean, those two things are quite distinct, although they tend to overlap in significant ways as well.  And the emergence of a private sector in a number of countries has taken a commercial form, but in other places, the private sector is really fairly similar to the existing public sector.  
[00:29:21]
In some countries, the private sector operates outside the state.  In other countries, parts of the private sector are very much regulated closely.  And that's almost like an arm of state policy.  I think, for example, of the Malaysian private colleges, where-- which are so closely regulated by the state and play a central role in a kind of division of labor vis-a-vis the public institutions in a number of respects.  So, you know, you get these sort of regulated private sectors.  But you get these open private sectors that are either commercial or non-commercial.  So, the private sector is a complicated beast and it can be a modifying element and often it is not.  You know, commodification, if by that we mean the commercial market relations, as for master’s students for example in the Westminster countries, that can occur inside public institutions, as well as in private institutions, and it does.  And research of course is an area where commercial research, commercial research artifacts come out of, say, some public institutions but also at the same time free knowledge, public-good knowledge is produced by private institutions.  
[00:30:26]
So, private and public is one thing.  Market and non-market is another.  And I think if we separate those, we begin I think to make a whole discussion of-- on one hand commodification, and on the other hand, the role of the state, a much better one.  

[00:30:42]
>> That's really helpful.  And thank you very much actually for sharing those thoughts with us today, Simon.  