Production Transcript for ThriftPodcast-Wk5-Global.mp3




[00:00:00]
>> Hi Nigel, welcome to our MOOC, and thank you very much for sharing some of your insights and ideas in relationship to broader sort of global processes and trends and debates with respect to higher education.  

[00:00:18]
>> And welcome to you, too.  

[00:00:21]
>> I've got a few questions to ask, and these are pretty big, sprawling questions, so we'd appreciate your insights, given that you've been quite active and involved in some of these debates and issues.  So I guess the first one is the world of higher education is changing quickly and rapidly.  On the one hand because of new players and providers that are entering into the sector and on the other hand as new arms of the state, for example, ministries of finance or ministries of trade and investment also get involved, and start promoting education—including higher education—as an export industry, as an export sector.  What big conversations do you think need to be held about such development patterns and trends?  

[00:01:12]
>> So let me start I think with the pressures.  There are two of these, I think.  One of them is that, as you quite rightly mentioned, there are new players and providers in the sector.  Specifically, more and more private for-profit players, and at the same time more people who believe they should have a say about higher education.  Whether it's consultants or whether it's ranking organizations and so on and so forth.  On the other side, the other big thing going on, I think, is that governments increasingly are seeing higher education not just as an arm of education but also as an export industry in its own right.  So if you think about Australia, that's now I think higher education is now the fourth larger export industry for Australia.  In the UK according to its survey, it's somewhere between number seven and number nine.  
[00:02:18]
The results of this, not surprisingly, is that higher education has become something that many people want a part of.  The problem, the big conversation that needs to be had, is how much of a part of higher education they should be allowed to have.  There's no right answer to this, governments quite rightly would say, look, it's taxpayers funding a lot of what you do, so we should have a right to say what goes on.  Even though it's quite clear that autonomy is an important part of how universities are successful.  The new players and providers entering into the sector have a different agenda: usually they're trying simply to make money.  Now do I think that this debate is being had? It is, but in ways which will never go anywhere.  In that what happens is you just get two opposing views, and while that's happening the university is changing anyway.  
[00:03:28]
And what we need is a big debate actually talking about what universities are like now, not what they used to be like twenty years ago.  

[00:03:41]
>> That's a very good point to make.  I guess you talked about some of the bigger broader debates, the new players, and how universities are changing.  In aggregate, this generates some broader patterns and trends and sometimes structural changes.  In which ways do you think the emerging global higher education research landscape is marked by tendencies of inclusion and also exclusion?  

[00:04:10]
>> So I think this is one of the interesting things, actually.  So in many ways higher education has become more inclusive.  If you look back, I don't know, thirty, forty years, you'd see that mainly higher education institutions were quite small, and they were there simply to educate elites.  Nowadays higher education systems are mass systems on the whole and they are educating very large numbers of people.  And to that extent they are definitely including more people.  There's still a problem, of course, over the kind of people that they actually are including, and it is still true that the people from less well-off backgrounds in those countries find it much more difficult to get into university.  But that's less true, generally, I suspect, than it was.  The problem of our exclusion comes with the really elite universities.  
[00:05:13]
There, I don't think things have moved on all that much, if I'm honest.  And we still have quite a big struggle to get to a point where we can say that there's a level playing field in terms of those more elite institutions.  And we can understand the reasons why that is, but at the same time, universities should be as a matter of principle offering education to the brightest and the best, wherever they may be.  And any way you look at it, there's still some way to go.  

[00:05:51]
>> Okay, great.  Thank you.  Shifting sort of focus a little bit, you stated in a recent article that, “Yet, as higher education internationalizes, it seems to me that some kind of more formal and more integrated global governance of universities may become necessary.”  Just to carry on a little bit, “a series of networks and ad hoc public and private institutions cannot cover this gap. National regulation of the universities is no longer enough as universities increasingly become global organizations.” Can you sort of paint a picture of what you're making -- the point you're making there and what you're envisioning with respect to thinking about the futures of really in some ways the sort of small-g global governance of higher education?  

[00:06:49]
>> So in a sense, it repeats the point I’ve made in a different way. We are getting global governance of higher education, but it is being done on the whole to us, and what I would like to see is a bit more of us doing it.  It's as straightforward as that.  It is a question, really, of whether we do it or they do it, and at the moment it's them doing it.  And the them of course is very diverse, it's government, it's non-government organizations, it's private-sector firms, it's all sorts of institutions.  But on the whole, universities were always meant to be self-governing entities.  And they've become, of course, less and less that.  Now the issue then becomes what can you actually do about this.  At the moment universities are not particularly good at cooperating with each other except in the case of research.  
[00:07:53]
And  even there, of course, they still compete wildly with each other around the world, even though their staff actually are often certainly in research cooperating with people in other countries simply as a matter of routine.  They don't even think about it, it's just what they do.  So the problem is, can we find a government structure which allows universities to have some say in a more general sense by the direction that higher education takes?  At the moment, I can't say I'm optimistic, but on the other hand if you don't think about these things and set out on them, then nothing is going to happen.  

[00:08:34]
>> I mean, do you think the relative absence of highly influential intergovernmental player in higher education, there are of course UNESCO and OECD, but compared to other sectors, for example, health, that's not nearly as developed.  So do you think the relative absence of a higher -- highly influential intergovernmental player perhaps leaves more or perhaps less room, actually, for non-governmental players such as associations of universities to play a role in this?  

[00:09:08]
>> Well, I'm sure that some kind of intergovernmental player in the end would actually be necessary.  Because if you want to do these things at the world level, it's pretty difficult to see other ways you could do it which actually have any traction.  One of the interesting things is why the UN actually has so little involvement on the whole in universities, and I don't know the answer to that.  But be careful what you wish for, because of course when these intergovernmental agencies actually get involved with universities, often what they do is simply say we need more competition, we need more ranking, et cetera, et cetera.  And I'm not sure that either of those things necessarily applies.  

[00:09:53]
>> That's a nice segue to the final question that we've got to ask you, and that's a difficult one to respond to, I realize.  But what is really in the end the purpose of the university, and what we're sort of hinting at here given the broader sort of agenda, structural changes, the new players that are coming into play here, I mean, how do various stakeholders associated with the universities like faculty, leaders, alumni, et cetera, how do we ensure that important non-economic development-oriented and non-STEM fields and non-STEM knowledge producers survive, but not even just survive but actually prosper?  

[00:10:47]
>> So my view on this is that the purpose of a university is actually not dissimilar from I think what most people would say, it's to expand knowledge and pass that knowledge on.  So there's still that core there, come what may.  But having said that, other things have been added on to modern universities, and I don't think in a way that one should try and deny that, it's not possible to go back.  The point then becomes, so what actually can we do to make all of those other additions into something which also doesn't actually threaten things like non-STEM related fields and knowledge producers?  Now I think that can be done, actually.  There's no reason to believe that on the whole a lot of these various stakeholders with their politicians or industrialists or alumni are desperately trying to trash out non-STEM related fields, they're not.  
[00:11:58]
I'm sure of that.  And if you look, actually, at the giving that's being done in a lot of universities, actually I think that that gives the lie to precisely that kind of narrative.  The problem more is that those fields start to die by neglect, and that's where I think basically faculty and students in universities simply have to fight back.  Basically have to say, right, this is what we’re doing, it is good and it is worthwhile.  And university leaders can't do that by themselves, it's just ludicrous to suggest that.  You need proper campaigns, you need serious politics from a whole series of different kinds of groupings.  And if you do that my feeling is it will be successful.  There's no inexorable push towards anything in the modern world, everything can be changed.  

[00:12:56]
>> Okay.  Well great.  Well thank you for your reflections and thoughts on these challenging issues and complex transformations, and we appreciate it and thanks, on behalf of the participants in our MOOC.  

[00:13:11]
>> Thank you.  