Production Transcript for VanDerWendePodcast.mp3




[00:00:02]
>> Hello, Merik [assumed spelling].  Thank you very much for talking to us and sharing the wealth of your knowledge with the participants in our MOOK [assumed spelling].  I've got a few questions to ask you and why don't we start off first of all and really raise the question about why was Amsterdam University College opened at the particular time in 2009 that it was.  

[00:00:29]
>> Right.  I think one of the main rationales for establishing Amsterdam University College, AUC was the need that we felt responsible globalization and the globally competitive environment to join forces and establish a joint excellence initiative in order to nurture talent and to attract it internationally.  The Netherlands has a strong higher education system especially a strong university sector but I think it was felt that we needed to differentiate in response to this global competition.  At the same time we had another trend to respond to from secondary school system where bilingual and international education was becoming more and more popular and I think a third reason but that was also where we had to focus in this excellence initiative was the need to train more students to attract more students to the sciences.  
[00:01:49]
All of that together I think made us decide to establish AUC as an international liberal art and science college.  

[00:02:00]
>> Okay.  Great.  I mean that was a really helpful explanation of sort of the driving forces in establishing AUC.  It's a particular type of higher education institution and so perhaps you could outline in a little bit more detail than is available on the AUC website which we'll be directing people to, the sort of core mission and values associated with the development of the college, so.  Perhaps you could unpack it and complement what we can read on the website itself.  

[00:02:31]
>> Okay.  Yeah, so we needed a different type of program in the Netherlands to attract particularly talented and internationally oriented students and it hadn't really become clear in the 10 years before we established it a liberal arts and science culture was a way to go there because it's very distinct from the regular type of programs at undergraduate level in the Dutch universities, which are typically very narrow [inaudible] programs.  So that was that part.  Secondly, I think this response and you can see the results by now after 5 years.  This response to the need for what is sometimes called 21st Century skills but not just the soft science if you like, of it for which our liberal arts and science [inaudible] are well known.  
[00:03:41]
Like team work, critical thinking, analytical skills, [inaudible], but that's in combination with [inaudible].  So very, very [inaudible] science technology, engineering, math, infomatics, IT, et cetera, et cetera.  So that is, if you like, the curriculum profile that we have.  Another characteristic or it's actually our motto, mission, excellence in diversity in a global city.  The combination is more obvious in certain context than in others but we believe that if we're educating people for a global society we need that combination to learn to compete, and to cooperate and to cooperate with people different than yourself.  
[00:04:44]
And I think that's what we're trying to bring together.  

[00:04:49]
>> Just a follow on from your response there perhaps you could explain a little bit more about where the mission and the values sort of came from, who was involved and what kinds of people and organizations were associated with this in a bit more detail.  

[00:05:05]
>> Right.  The two universities in the end decided to do it together.  That was a strategic decision.  In the beginning, it was one of the universities that invited me to come to them to develop this new concept and I had the privilege to engage with an increasingly larger group.  Undisputed academic leadership in the university and I think that that was the key to success that it was sustained and supported initiative, supported by the top of the university directors.  But carried out and carried true by very well-respected academics from across all the disciplines that the university wanted to bring together in this program.  

[00:06:06]
>> Okay.  That helps lay a bit more context which is quite relevant for this particular week.  It was established, AUC, in 2009 there's a variety of other shifts going on at the same time with the establishment of, for example, different institutions that said King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, the sort of murmurings and eventual development a couple of years later of things like Cornell Tech, New York City, Yale and US College.  So perhaps you could situation AUC's development in the context of other experiments in new types of higher education institutions.  

[00:06:48]
>> Right.  It's, of course, never easy to compare across very different context but there was some growing signs at the time so explanation can probably in these cases be derived from the general concepts.  Like globalization and the entering competition that is felt, indeed, in different context as much drive for excellence and for attracting talent.  The global war [phonetic] on talent and the recognition I think that we need to equip students with a different set of skills for success in this global environment and that we do need to create another type of learning environment for that.  

[00:07:43]
>> I guess that leads directly into my next question which is and I mentioned Yale and US but some analysts have suggested that this particular model, this American Liberal Arts College model is globalizing albeit with significant adaptations and mutations along the way.  I mean, do you think that the American Liberal Arts College model is globalizing?  If so, why do you think this is happening?  

[00:08:12]
>> There is some evidence that the liberal arts model is global.  American model is another thing.  I think that in Europe we feel that we're finding our roots back and liberal arts was the origin of the European universities in the Middle Ages.  It seems that we're coming back from over specialization as we come to understand that the advancement of knowledge is not going to happen within but across these disciplinary fields in [inaudible].  Yeah, there's certainly adaptations here at Amsterdam for instance we focus a lot on the sciences as part of the broader liberal arts and science model.  That's not just in Amsterdam.  I think that that is an important difference from the traditional liberal arts model in the US which is more or less equivalent to non-professional to more humanities and some social sciences.  
[00:09:22]
So here in Amsterdam and I think more generally in the Netherlands we focus on a broader liberal arts and sciences model.  As a result, we're able to attract far more students to major in the sciences than in traditional disciplinary science program, and I think it's because students like the flexibility, the broad choices and combinations, the novelty [phonetic] of combinations they can make.  Here at Amsterdam we have 50% of our students majoring in the sciences and among them over 60% are female students.  I think that's extraordinary and it's not in just the green or the [inaudible] sizes or the premetrics it's also in physics, math, informatics so they make original choices in this model that they tend to shy away from in other context.  In other regions, other adaptations are being made.  If we look for instance, Asia, China.  
[00:10:28]
An explanation why this model seems to be globalizing I think it's a great model for excellence in undergraduate education for the 21st Century because it enables students to develop STEM and 21st Century soft skills at the same time and I think that's the trick for undergraduate education in this Century.  

[00:10:53]
>> Okay.  I guess that raises the next question really which is how have the local and regional context and here I'm thinking about Amsterdam, the Ronstadt [phonetic], the Netherlands, Europe, Western Europe, the European Higher Education Area, in which AUC is embedded, how have these shaped AUC's development strategy?  

[00:11:19]
>> Right.  Well, Amsterdam is the perfect environment as a locally oriented program which AUC offers.  The city is not just a metaphor of the global world, the global city, but it's actually an actual learning environment, learning lab.  We have 180 nationalities learning together here and that brings all the richness, so cultural diversity and multi-national commercial activity but also the challenges of globalization.  The challenges like inequality between the winners and losers of globalization, tensions between cultural groups.  So, that is a great learning lab so we make sure the students are immersed and actually confronted with that.  For instance by freshmen courses on identity and diversity in a global city which includes a lot of field work by community projects, by inviting interesting speakers who are in town for lecture, et cetera.  
[00:12:24]
We have in this place, which is a global magnet, 50% of our students from abroad with over 70 nationalities, but of course, a lot of them from Europe because the European higher education area is very, very beneficial context because of the framability [phonetic] that it allows students to undertake.  But also from beyond Europe we have the students and faculty coming from all over the world and we think that creates an environment that really allows the student to achieve that mission at best.  Together with, of course, the City of Amsterdam as a great research environment.  We have the science part but also as a cultural and a corporate scene that this city offers us.  

[00:13:19]
>> I mean did you, were you aware of all the multiple sort of benefits of being embedded in a city, for example, versus a rural, isolated rural area when you were establishing the college or have there been some surprises that you've learned along the way in the few years that the AUC has been open?  

[00:13:42]
>> Yes, we were aware, but you have to be able to make it work for you and that is something else.  It requires a new institution to be extremely open to its environment, engaging, inviting and willing to share resources and inspiration with the corporation, the research center [phonetic], the secondary schools, the other faculties of the universities, the city council.  So, in other words, you want to be successful in a rich environment you have to know how to share and to make friends.  

[00:14:30]
>> Okay.  I guess the last question I have for you in some ways is a lead on from the question we just discussed.  I mean, what do you think about the relationship between higher education institutions and systems and cities and city regions?  Are there changes do you think that are underway right now in relationship to this higher ed city/city region dynamic?  Are there some new emerging patterns or perhaps are these just long established relationships where nothing is really changing?  So the city, higher education institution relationship, what's happening?  

[00:15:12]
>> Yeah, that's an interesting question and we could look at globalization theory to do a little analysis there and I will not choose the globalization phases that says the nation states are going to be disappearing.  I think that's too farfetched, but from economic globalization analysis we learned the cities or city regions are increasingly important.  The local global nexus if you like and perhaps more so than countries as national states.  They may explain why in a number of places and city governments become more active players in the higher education sector and New York is an example, Amsterdam certainly.  The interesting thing at the same time is that these cities don't necessarily have the competencies to steer [phonetic] universities here.  
[00:16:14]
In Amsterdam, for instance, the city has no formal authority for instance by funding the university or by awarding them the granting status of powers.  Maybe someday they will.  Like in the old days because until the 1980s the University of Amsterdam was the City University of Amsterdam, that was its official name and then it became a state university if you like.  So maybe we're going to see some decentralization back to the more local level and in the context of the Netherlands in Europe that could set a decentralization trend that we see in other sectors as well.  

[00:17:01]
>> Okay.  Well, that's a great explanation and certainly a lot of food for thought for our discussions this week.  So, on behalf, again of all the participants in our MOOK we'd like to thank you very much for your contributions to the learning process.  

[00:17:20]
>> Thank you, Chris.  It was a pleasure talking to you.  

[00:17:22]
>> Okay.  Good-bye.  