Production Transcript for Yelland Podcast - Week 2.MP3




[00:00:00]
>> Hello, Richard.  Welcome and thank you for speaking to the students at [Inaudible] --  

[00:00:07]
>> Thank you.  I'm delighted to have the opportunity.  

[00:00:11]
>> Well great.  So I've got a few questions to ask you.  And why don't we start off -- first of all, with a broader one about the OEC DD.  So what do you think the sort of distinctive role is with respect to the OECD's presence in debates about policies and programs, and higher education systems, so what's distinctive about the OECD's role?  

[00:00:39]
>> When I joined the OECD I was told that I'd find it was a cross between a government department and a university.  That -- they were quite wise words, and let me explain what I mean by that.  We have an intergovernmental organization, I'm a member of the secretariat, and my colleagues, we are paid my governments and we are expected to do what they want us to do, they set out a program of work on a biannual basis.  But having said that, we don't have the direct responsibility to minister issues that you'd find in a government department.  We have researchers who are looking into all sorts of different fields, and it's also part of our job to scan the horizon and to inform our governments of the problems which are coming up, whether that's in the field of climate change or trade or education.  
[00:01:41]
So there's that interesting combination.  Our role in education which has not historically been a field in which there has been concerted government action, it's been a nationalized industry if you like, personal at the school level, so our role in education has been evolving quite quickly.  And I think the key distinguishing feature in recent years has been the capacity to assess performance of students in different countries.  And I'm talking about the visa program, the program of international students assessment.  That has quite clearly had an impact on the way in which we work, and it has an impact on our work in higher education as well.  
[00:02:43]
Now higher education is a very complex business.  It's not controlled by governments in all countries or the extent to which governments control it and from it varies, and we produce a lot of data that shows how much, where the money is coming from, whether it's coming from tax payers, whether it's coming from students' pockets.  And there's a whole discussion we could have on the financing of higher education, the tuition fees and the income [Inaudible] loans and all this sort of thing.  But I guess that's not what we're here for today.  So our role in higher education is -- it's really quite an interesting one, it seems to me.  We have an education policy committee.  They are the formal body which determines what we should be doing.  They are not always representing higher education ministries directly.  

[00:03:48]
>> Just to be clear, this committee, what types of people would be in it?  

[00:03:55]
>> Well, there would be people representing their governments, they would come from ministries of education and they would be focusing on the school level work.  We do work on higher education, but we also have a directive here in science and technology, we have other -- other people -- and we also have this other ways of getting at the higher education establish and development, if you like, through our center for educational research and innovation and also through our program on institutional management in higher education, with which I was quite closely concerned.  I don't think I need to go into great detail about -- about the governance of these things.  But what we tried to do is to bring together the points of view of governments, of these institutions, of stake holders, and also to understand as best we can what is actually going on in the world.  And that is a particularly challenging task because it's a very fast-moving field.  

[00:04:58]
>> Yeah, yeah.  Are there any similar organizations, be they public or private, to the OECD with respect to the higher education sector -- sphere.  

[00:05:13]
>> I'm -- there are many bodies which represent groups of institutions.  There might be organizations doing a similar sort of work at national level, but I'm not really aware of anybody who has quite our role.  And we do not make any rules, we do not make any laws, we don't make any decisions.  We present ideas and indicators, we bring people together, a lot of our work is networking between different sorts of people.  

[00:05:53]
>> Okay.  I mean on a -- sort of directly related note, some people have argued rightly or wrongly that the OECD is a piece of learning machinery.  So if that's the case, and you can reflect on that perspective or argument, how do you know where the hat of the OECD, that you achieved your desired learning outcomes to some of the current language in higher education with respect to, for example, have initiatives, have key reports, have key programs generated the kind of impact factor that you ideally would like?  

[00:06:36]
>> You can answer that question in different ways.  We have -- the supreme body of the organization is the council, those are the representatives of the member countries.  They set up a program and they evaluate the impact at the end of those programs.  Beyond that, I think it's the work to some extent speaks for itself.  I referred just a few moments ago to Peter, international student assessment.  When we set out to do that, I don't think we would have had in mind a particular objective in term of learning outcome.  We knew that it was something that would be important if you could make it work, and let me explain, it's really the first -- not the first, one of the early and one of the best ways of comparing what 15-year-old students know in different countries.  
[00:07:43]
And it goes beyond the curriculum, the content of the curriculum to a competence-based approach, if you like.  It started 15 years ago, the 2012 report is due out in December.  It has undoubtedly had an impact on policy-making in many countries.  And you can judge its success by the number of countries who take part in it, which is current approaching 80.  That is to say it goes way beyond the OECD's membership.  That approach to assessing the quality of education rather than simply reporting on its structure or its components, we have recently extended to adult skills with the very recent launch of the adult skills survey, and the same idea, people talking about similar ideas, whether it's in early childhood education, or invocation education or in higher education, the notion that there is a value in assessing the outcome of education at national or institutional or system level so that the member countries can learn from it.  
[00:09:11]
Now I -- I'm still bearing your question in mind, we do not impose Peta or the adult skills survey on anybody.  These are expensive and complex surveys which countries and others need to put a great deal of effort into their participation.  And they'll only do that if they think it's worthwhile.  And it's not worthwhile just because there's a headline every now and again which says that your country is either doing well or doing badly or somewhere in the middle.  The value in analysis is in the way it can look at the context in which people are learning and then provide guidance for policy makers, for institutions, for teachers, on how they might improve.  

[00:10:05]
>> Okay.  That's -- that's a great response.  I guess on a somewhat related note, deal with another initiative, I mean, what are the initiatives you've been trying to get going is the halo program, and our students [Inaudible] and profiles of what it is.  What do you think some of the main challenges have been in getting a halo going?  

[00:10:38]
>> This could be a very long answer.  [Laughter] The -- the primary point is that higher education has expanded radically in the last fifty years.  It's gone from being the elite to the mass -- at least in OECD countries, the universal provision with credit and marching [Inaudible].  That is -- that expansion is also taking place across the developing world.  So this -- in the context, there's a massive market there for higher education.  Part of that is the global market.  There is a great thirst, that's just one of the political [Inaudible] to understand what the quality of higher education is that is being offered in different countries.  One of the ways in which that is done is through global rankings of institutions, perhaps we'll come back to that in a minute.  
[00:11:49]
There has been  no comparable international assessment of what it is that students learn, what it is they can do as they come out of a first degree program.  There is clearly an analogy with the assessment of students at 15.  Some countries, some institutions are putting great efforts into coming out of the quality assurance movement into looking at learning outcomes and into [Inaudible] always intended to be an international assessment.  The challenges are many, the complexity of dealing with higher education is a dimension or two greater than education for 15-year-olds.  
[00:12:50]
The average age at which a Swedish student starts their first degree is a little bit older than the average age an Australian student completes their first degree, are you comparing like with like.  You have the discipline structure of higher education, how can you compare economics with engineering, with humanities.  That is why in the feasibility study that we conducted we tried to look at the generic skills, the competencies which might typify graduates.  But there's -- there's a very considerable debate to be had about whether there is international agreement about those things.  I think the feasibility study that we conducted have demonstrated that there is that, the question which is now open is how we take that thought.  
[00:13:50]
There is also to be frank, a political challenge as well.  There are fears that, quote, standardized test would impose constraints on higher education institutions which are improper and infringe their autonomy.  There are concerns that information could be misused for accountability purposes for which it was not intended.  We've been very clear, I hope, that the aim of a [Inaudible] would be to first of all to assess [Inaudible] to see whether it's possible to make an assessment, possible and practical to make an assessment, this type of cement, but then to use it to -- or to enable countries and institutions to use it to improve higher education.  
[00:14:51]
Not for us to determine how this could be used.  And the debate remains open at this moment.  

[00:14:59]
>> It certainly does sync well with the whole initiative to focus on the learning outcomes.  We're required, for example, to state what our objectives are and syllabi, there are assessments that are undertaken at the end of courses, at the end of degrees, feedback needs to be provided during departmental reviews.  So in terms of the timing I can certainly see how they sync well.  Bringing this all together, though, is another thing.  

[00:15:30]
>> Yes.  I mean the -- you can -- some hard liners will say this institution is giving public money to educate students to do a certain job, and they need to really be a little bit more clear about what it is that the students are going to get out of it.  Many institutions would subscribe to the point of view that they're in the market and it's in their interests to actually demonstrate their added value.  Technically, though, it is extremely difficult.  

[00:16:05]
>> Great.  Thank you.  Shifting on to the issue of higher education the globalization of higher education research , one of the phenomenon that seems to be emerging is an increase in perhaps ironically, an increasing awareness of sort of footprint of higher education institutions, their role in enabling cities, city regions to develop.  And in particular, in global city regions.  And I know the OECD has been furthering a variety of initiatives and thinking about this whole issue of higher education and city region development, and so one thing I know that our students will be interested in knowing a bit more about is sort of where does the higher education city region to the program fit, thinking both backwards and forward with respect to OECD agendas, debates, programs, intellectual sort of life within this organization?  

[00:17:22]
>> Yeah.  Good question.  One comment I'd make is that it is becoming increasingly difficult to make sensible statements about higher education institutions as a group or about universities as a group.  There are many, many different types of institutions.  And those institutions have different missions.  One of the analogies I like to use is of the department store, if you like.  There are one or two places which  attempt to sell everything to all customers.  I won't name any commercial outlets, but you can guess some.  They have an international reach, they have online delivery.  They will sell you anything from a stuffed tiger to a screw driver.  
[00:18:33]
There are some universities like that.  There are others which have a much more limited mission.  I think part of the problem with the global rankings of institutions is that they measure universities on their -- primarily on their research output and their research impact.  Therefore, if you wish to move up the scale you're obliged as an institution to boost your research, citations, by bringing people in or whatever.  Now higher education institutions all do some combination of research, teaching and learning, and what is sometimes called the third mission, often called service.  
[00:19:43]
And it's -- it's in this slightly ill-defined third area where in fact many institutions which are essentially local or regional and city based have their greatest impact.  They were established to serve a particular city.  They are being pulled away from that vital function for reasons of esteem, perhaps because the funding is not being -- the funding incentives are not properly aligned, the human incentives for faculty are not properly aligned.  Now the reason we here at the OECD got into this discussion was a confluence of interest from education people, but also from the people who are concerned with regional department.  
[00:20:53]
Who increasingly observing that the two key things you needed -- I should get the citation right, you need for a region are an airport and a university.  But then you need that university to be working for that region and not necessarily working to attract students from other countries or to push itself up the research rankings.  So that's how we got into the discussion.  It proved to be something which has been a very considerable interest to a number of cities and regions, and we have produced a whole string of reports.  There's -- this relates not only to the work of the education directorate, I'm sorry for internal cuisine, but it's working on local economic and employment initiatives, work on innovation and how -- the development of clusters and all of that sort of thing.  
[00:21:53]
So it really speaks to quite a broad political agenda, if you like.  

[00:22:00]
>> Okay.  On a related note, you did mention rankings, and any discussion of the globalization of higher education and research has to grapple with rankings.  And I know you've reflected on them in the past a fair bit.  So I'd be curious and no doubt our students would be as well, what do you think some of the key benefits and problems are associated with the emergence of wonderful university ranking schemes, including the one for example, by [Inaudible] times higher education or the Asian ranking of [Inaudible] --  

[00:22:39]
>> Yes, the so-called Shanghai hierarchy.  These initiatives have clearly responded to a need  a perceived need on either potential students or of companies or all sorts of others to have some sort of an idea of how to compare.  Because they know that not every graduate is the same.  In that sense, they fulfill a useful purpose, the extent to which they are transparent about their methodology, which they are increasingly, is a good thing.  The -- the down side, if you like, is that sometimes their message is interpreted in a quick headline.  Which -- which focuses too much on the top twenty or the -- you know, so this institution or that institution has slipped down or up.  
[00:23:48]
And these are really not the essential issues.  And the -- as I have said, the extent that they really focus attention on one of the missions of institutions and thereby creating incentive for those -- divert the attention of institutions or faculty away from the other missions, that is -- that can be a problem now that the solution to that is not to abolish rankings or ban rankings, it's to be very clear about what they do and do not assess, improve their methodology, and there has been some extent work done by those organs and organizations which are conducting rankings to try to work together to develop principles on which they would take their work forward, to be open about their criteria, and to the extent possible, to take account of what it is that institutions are trying to achieve and what it is that their stake holders want from them.  
[00:25:08]
The center for higher education development in Germany has this approach.  But it's not an easy task.  It is extremely hard to compare what students have learned and can do and the contribution of institutions to that across countries.  It is I would say even more difficult to try to make some sort of a judgment about the contribution of an institution to local economic development.  There has been a -- there has been -- still is, a very interesting initiative being conducted by the European commission to create a multi-dimensional ranking of universities in Europe.  That is moved on from a feasibility stage to his first full roll out and it will be really interesting to see what progress they can make.  
[00:26:09]
But I wouldn't underestimate the technical and all political difficulties of it producing something useful.  

[00:26:17]
>> I guess in part drawing on your experience with the halo initiative as well, knowing how that went.  And to be clear, that drove down to the level of institutions and disciplines, the halo initiative.  [Inaudible] to be realized.  Would -- would individual institutions be publicly recognized in any halo-based analysis?  Or is that to be determined?  

[00:26:44]
>> I think that remains to be determined.  I mean, the bottom line is that countries, individuals, we all invest an enormous amount in higher education and research, a growing amount, and there's nothing sinister about trying to understand the impact of that investment and how best to direct it.  You know, education has to compete with health and climate and all of the other challenges.  And it's really incumbent upon -- certainly I feel that it's incumbent upon us within the higher education system to make sure that that investment of time and money is best used.  

[00:27:28]
>> Well great.  Thank you very much for speaking with us.  And we appreciate the time.  We'll say good-bye.  

[00:27:36]
>> Thank you.  