Production Transcript for Gabriel Hawawini podcast - Week 6.mp3




[00:00:01]
>> Hi, we're here talking with Gabriel Hawawini, who has a lot of very informative experience and insights in relationships to the development of branch campuses and the internationalization process and as well about the development of INSEAD Singapore campus, so welcome to our MOOC, Gabriel.  

[00:00:23]
>> Thank you.  

[00:00:24]
>> I've got a few questions to ask you, and really these questions reflect — and feel free to sort of just absolutely adopt the INSEAD perspective or standpoint on this — the questions are all really framed around, what does Singapore mean to INSEAD?  And so you're not really being ask to comment about Singapore from a Singaporean perspective, but really what does this unique global education hub experiment mean to your institution?  So the first question is why did INSEAD decide to open up a campus in Singapore?  And at the particular time that it was in INSEAD's institutional development, INSEAD's institutional history?  

[00:01:09]
>> Yes, Kris, this is an important question and as you know INSEAD is a management school founded in the late 50’s, early 60's.  And I would say in the late 90's when you looked at the school, the school was very European.  I would say that 70-75% of our students as well as faculty, including administrators, trustees and other, were actually from Europe.  So even though we had the label “international” associated with the school, when one looked closely one could see that this is very much a European school and a very much Western European school.  So the thinking at that time was that if we wanted to break away from our European mold, we had to go abroad.  
[00:02:21]
We had to take the institution out of its home in France, and doing so would allow us to attract talented students and talented faculty from around the world.  So actually, it was getting harder for us to attract foreign students into Europe, or even to attract non-European faculty into France.  So we felt that we had to move, and a presence in Asia would allow us to diversify further our student body and our faculty.  So in essence, that was the turning point, in the late 90’s, when the school decided to move from being a European one to becoming a truly international one.  

[00:03:25]
>> Was there a particular trigger or thing that just — I imagine some of these discussions were sort of bubbling up for many years — but was there a tipping point moment or trigger?  

[00:03:36]
>> Correct. I mean, I can give you specific examples to illustrate the point.  As you know we were a European school, requiring our MBA students to speak multiple European languages, in addition to English, in particular a requirement to speak French.  And then we realized that there were very bright Asian students that said that they would very much like to join INSEAD but were not ready to actually invest a whole year to pick up the French language and that they would opt to go to another place, most likely the United States, where no language requirement would be demanded of them.  
[00:04:42]
So we noticed that we were actually losing, or, we were unable to attract top talent.  Of course, we could have done away with the French and still stayed in Paris, but then of course there were issues with non-European faculty that wanted to actually come to us but with their family, wanted to educate their children in English-speaking schools, which were not available south of Paris where INSEAD is located.  So you can see then, when you add up the language barrier, when you add up the inability of the faculty to educate their children in English-speaking schools.  
[00:06:01]
A third example would be for spouses of faculty not being European and unable to find work permits.  A lot of those issues get resolved once you move to Singapore, as you realize.  

[00:06:20]
>> Okay, okay, thank you very much.  I mean, you've raised a good point about the sort of push factors, the impetus to reach out across space, in this case you went to Pacific Asia and considered a variety of places, Hong Kong, KL, Singapore and so on.  Why did you choose the model that you did?  For example, you could have established a unit in local university, or international collaborative degrees, or you could have done a joint venture.  In the end, you developed an autonomous campus that quickly became your Asia campus, an equal partner to the one in France.  So why did you adopt the model that you did?  

[00:07:14]
>> Again, Kris, we have opted for what I refer to as the outward model because we felt that if we wanted to achieve a radical transformation, remember as I said earlier, we were very European and if you really wanted to make that transition into a truly international school, you had to opt for the more radical outward-looking model.  Of course, alliances with foreign schools and joint programs and related activities would help, but would not provide that radical transformation that we felt would actually seriously take the school out of its European mold into an international one.  
[00:08:15]
So that is the reason why we opted for this more extreme approach.  I think, Kris, that it is also worth noting that our campus in Asia is not a branch and notice, by the way, it is not called an Asian campus.  It is called an Asia campus.  It is not a branch, and the way to understand this is to go back to our motto that says it is one school with two locations, one school with two campuses.  The two campuses, as you well know Kris, are fully integrated with faculty as well as students moving seamlessly between the two locations.  So it is not like we have a head campus and a branch campus.  It is one school with two campuses of equal weight.  And no distinguish between the two.  
[00:09:22]
You get a degree that is an INSEAD degree, that does not mention whether you took your courses in one location or the other.  And typically our student would actually take, close to 80% of our students actually experience the two locations during their studies, and our faculty actually moves around and teaches in both campuses.  So that is the idea here.  The branch campus model does not apply to what we have achieved: the one-school, multiple-location model.  

[00:10:25]
>> Okay great, thank you very much.  You've got, now got a decade-plus worth of experience, and so no doubt acquired a lot of insights about the challenges, really, of creating an Asia, not an Asian, but an Asia campus in Singapore.  So what have been really the main challenges associated with this institutional development process?  

[00:10:59]
>> Well, Kris, this should not come as a surprise, we're talking about processes related to higher education institutions, and as you can imagine the most important challenge is an internal one and as I alluded to earlier had to do with convincing our faculty. Mostly our faculty, but not just our faculty, some of our alumni, some of our trustees, convincing them that going abroad would not dilute the brand, would not end up weakening the institution.  That was the major concern of those who were reluctant to make the move.  The fear, again, that there will be a dilution of the brand, of the identity, of the school and again alumni, as you can imagine, having actually studied in one location, feel that now going abroad may actually change the whole spirit of what INSEAD is all about.  
[00:12:19]
So that was I believe the main challenge.  And this goes back to what I may have mentioned in other discussions with you, where you need to actually convince some key constituents, some champions to get the process going.  But once the skeptics were convinced that the move may actually strengthen the brand instead of diluting it, the model became accepted.  But it was a very long and painful process.  

[00:13:03]
>> And is this a communications challenge as well internally, or is this an experiential challenge?  How do you actually share knowledge about this process to learn?  

[00:13:23]
>> You are completely correct in highlighting this issue, because those of us who felt that there will be no delusion of brand, even possibly a strengthening of it, had no proof of that.  Obviously we were taking a chance and a risk.  It could have actually backfired and not worked.  Essentially, I would argue, what has been extremely helpful is also what we call our pioneer students: the very few ones who actually signed up to start their MBA program in Singapore.  They took a chance.  And then, slowly, it was clear that they were able to get the jobs, that actually companies were very attracted by their Asian experience, and that actually has strengthened the placement aspect.  
[00:14:31]
And then slowly, slowly then, students realized that eventually this may be a plus, not a minus.  And then the ball starts rolling, and so on.  So you have to take a chance.  You have to get started.  You have to identify the pioneers, and those will be your ambassadors.  Of course, had the pioneers come and been disappointed, we may have not been as successful as we are today.  

[00:15:05]
>> Great, thank you.  Since the initial deliberations about establishing a campus in Asia occurred, really it's been probably 15, 17 years or so.  You've now got a lot of experience in Singapore itself, a small city-state, a very intense active place to be based. How has the Singaporean context, broadly defined, changed since INSEAD’s campus was established?  So how has Singapore changed?  

[00:15:45]
>> Indeed Kris, anyone who's been reading and watching what's happening in this part of the world is fully aware that there's been major changes taking place over the last 10+ years, and I would argue that, in a way, the fact that Singapore developed the way it did over the recent past, the last 15+ years, has actually, I would argue, strengthened the case for Singapore.  Another way to put this is to say that if we had to make the decision today for a location, we would, I would argue, opt again for Singapore.  Now let me explain why this is the case, and let me make it as concrete as possible.  
[00:16:55]
Often, and that should not come as a surprise, Kris, people say if you had to do this again today, would you go to China?  Of course in the late 90’s, China was not an option because it was not open to foreign higher education students, but today it is, and the answer is to say no.  We would still go to Singapore today.  Now why is it so?  Now two important points, Kris, general points that go beyond INSEAD.  As an institution we wanted to keep our multicultural identity.  Had we gone to China, we would have quickly become a Chinese school because of the size of the local market.  
[00:18:00]
It is very difficult to remain an international school if your environment is putting on you immense demands, difficult to remain multicultural.  The Chinese, I mentioned, eventually takes over.  So you want to go into a location where the risk of assimilation is minimal, and you could see that moving into a small open country would protect the institution from being taken over by its environment.  It will allow the institution to keep its identity.  That is the first point, and by the way as an aside, Kris, as an aside but related point, I would argue that this is also the major challenge of American higher education institutions to internationalize.  
[00:19:08]
You have a vast local country that has many demands.  It is very difficult to justify higher education institutions in the U.S. that caters exclusively to foreigners.  That is the point I want to make, and you have the same issue in a country like India.  Interestingly, if you look at management schools in Brazil you will see the same phenomenon again, and then when you look at smaller countries, like more open country, Switzerland, Singapore, Hong Kong, Holland, you will see more of the international dimension there.  So that is one point.  There's more to it.  There's another important point to keep in mind when an institution seeks a foreign location, and again this is a general comment I am making, not just about INSEAD.  
[00:20:19]
So I would argue that when an institution seeks out a foreign location, it needs to find one that has a compatible mission with the institution.  Let me explain.  The host country must have a mission and a motive that is consistent with the motive of the institution that wants to set up.  To be specific, Singapore in our case invited us to establish ourselves there, not to train the locals but to help Singapore achieve its goal of becoming an international educational hub as well as an R & D hub.  So the host country wanted to internationalize, and that matches perfectly the goal of INSEAD.  INSEAD did not want to go to Asia to train Asians.  INSEAD wanted to go to Asia to open Asia to the rest of the world, to raise its profile in Asia, and then to attract Asians into its Western Europe Campus.  
[00:21:33]
So to summarize, two issues: why a small country? why Singapore?  Number one, you can keep your identity as an international school because of the small local market.  Second point, that is not related to size but rather to the vision and mission of the host country, you want to make sure that the host country and your institution have matching objectives.  If you don't, it becomes the beginning of major, major issues between the host and the guest.  

[00:22:13]
>> Great, thank you.  That's very informative and helpful.  I think the final question really gives you a little bit of a chance to sort of wrap up. What are the greatest positive impacts of having physical, legal, institutional presence in Singaporean territory?  And these could be material, they could be intangibles.  So what are some of the greatest positive impacts of, like I said, lifting out an institution, reaching out across space, establishing formal — to use GATT’s parlance — commercial presence or formal legal presence in a territory versus simply having, for example, faculty traveling, students studying abroad? And in this case we're talking about Singapore.  

[00:22:50]
>> Indeed, Kris, a nice way of wrapping up, and that will give me a chance to insist on the key to the whole process is looking back at your own mission as an institution.  What do you want to achieve?  And then if going abroad helps you achieve that goal, then the move makes sense. Otherwise, I would argue, it may not be the right thing to do.  So, in our case it has allowed our institution, INSEAD, to become truly global.  As I said, we came from deep European roots.  So we were familiar with the multiculturalism dimension, but we didn't realize that the world is more than Europe.  And if we wanted to become truly global, we had to extract ourselves from the European mold in which we were born.  And to achieve our mission to educate future generations of really multifaceted global managers, a presence abroad would strengthen our ability to achieve that goal.  And that is the secret, it is the intimate matching and consistency of the move we have made, and our raison d’etre as an institution.  

[00:23:16]
>> Great.  Well that’s, like you said, a nice way to wrap up.  Thank you very much for all of your insights.  On behalf of all the participants in our MOOC, we really appreciate your time, and we look forward to reading your associated paper as well and thank you.  

[00:23:22]
>> Thank you very much, Kris, and good luck to those who are taking the course.  

[00:23:24]
>> Great.  Thank you.  Bye bye.  

[00:23:24]
>> Bye bye.  