Production Transcript for HazelkornPodcast.mp3




[00:00:01]
>> Hi, Ellen, welcome to our course, or our MOOC.  And I'd like to say on behalf of everybody who's taking the MOOC, thank you very much for sharing some of your knowledge about rankings, benchmarking, bibliometrics, and so on.  

[00:00:20]
>> Thanks very much, Kris.  And this is a great opportunity to talk to everyone around the world; gosh, it's really an exciting kind of venture, so thanks very much.  

[00:00:36]
>> Yeah, no problem.  I've got a few questions, so why don't we just tuck straight into the first one.  I guess why don't we step back a little bit and think in a more sort of broader historical context.  So why do you think we've witnessed the increased use and also influence of world university rankings, benchmarking, bibliometric analyses of research outputs and so on at this point in the history of higher education?  

[00:01:03]
>> Well, I expect my very simple answer to that is in a globalized world, globalized, global comparisons are inevitable.  I'm just trying to book a holiday now in Spain, and I'm going out to TripAdvisor and Booking.com, and I'm comparing what different people say about these different hotels.  Well, if we relate that to higher education, I think that's the same, part of the same environment.  I think there's also wider what I might say geopolitical issues that also come into play.  And we see a lot of it now because of the duration and the severity of the economic crisis.  But every country is looking very deeply and hard at how it can make itself increasingly more competitive.  
[00:02:04]
And as you know, higher education, or education, is one of the key factors of both personal and societal for benefit.  You know, people who have higher qualifications do better, they're healthier.  They're more democratic, hopefully they're more tolerant of other people and ways of life; and likewise, society benefits.  So in that context, we see a lot of countries vying with each other for their space in the global market.  People with high qualifications are really the key, so everyone is looking for people with big talent.  And that means one of the things we look at is where did these people -- where were they educated, what's their qualification?  And it all comes back to looking at the importance of higher education.  So aside from the fact that I said in a globalized world global comparisons are inevitable, we could say that higher education is a beacon or even a monitor of mobile capital and mobile talent.  
[00:03:20]
It's a thing that draws people to places and makes them attractive.  

[00:03:27]
>> I guess that begs the question about the pros and cons really of taking into account practices and outcomes with, for example, like rankings, again, benchmarking and bibliometric analyses.  So if you sort of perhaps take a university leader's perspective, or you think about them, and I know you've engaged with universities around the world, I mean, what do you think some of the pros, the main pros and the cons are of taking these into account, and how might this also vary depending on the particular geographies of various higher education institutions and systems?  

[00:04:06]
>> Yeah, it's a really complex kind of issue.  Part of it is that higher education is both, well, I like to say higher education's not an innocent victim in all this.  They're both a promoter and they're at the other end, you know, they're also, well, you could argue a victim to some extent, but they're not innocent.  What I mean by that is that from a higher education point of view, there are multiples of pros and cons.  They provide kind of simple tools to say who's in my peer group.  You see higher institutions, some university leaders using them to benchmark their performance, to see how well they're doing, to attract students, you know, see them using the rankings to assess whether or not they'll take on graduate students.  You see governments doing that.  
[00:05:07]
And yet, and you see them used through a whole range, you see scholarships based on that, the Russians are the most recent.  India is a really interesting example of how the Indian government is very concerned about the position of India and Indian institutions, concerned about where they sit or don't sit in the rankings.  And that goes back to my comment to say that they are a beacon or they're a way to attract mobile capital; so that could be either companies coming to your country or it could be investors in your institution, or it could be quote “smart” students.  But the negative side is that they actually tell us actually very little about higher education.  What they measure is very simplistic.  They use certain kind -- they predominantly measure research, and even when they don't appear to measure research, even the Times and QS, QS is about 50 percent, the Times is almost up to 80 percent of it is research-related indicators.  
[00:06:15]
So what they tend to measure in the main is research or reputation.  And it's arguably that the two of them feed off each other.  So people's perception of quality is very much influenced by what they read or what they see.  So it's a circular argument, what is everything that's wrong about reputational surveys.  

[00:06:45]
>> I guess if you think perhaps about this issue, and maybe I'll ask you to sort of extend your explanation here or analysis, what sort of values, priorities, and also I guess societally specific assumptions, if any, underlie the most influential world university rankings?  And here we'll focus on rankings versus benchmarking or bibliometrics.  

[00:07:10]
>> Yeah, let me go back and make one other comment about this, because I think if you're operating in developing countries or countries or indeed countries where a lot of what one might say is value or assessment of activity, is largely based upon oneself, or the peer review may not be standard.  And I'm not saying peer review is the answer to everything either.  But where there's not a culture of critique, rankings and these kinds of external indicators, external comparisons, have come into their own as a way in which both institutions and indeed governments use this, say, as an external critique or verifier of quality.  
[00:08:14]
And there are plus and minuses in that.  And I've talked to governments in a lot of different countries where they said, well, they have actually had some benefit.  Having said all that, the kinds of indicators that are used are terribly narrow.  And the comment I would often make to governments or administrators is to say, why are you actually using these indicators to set your national or institutional priorities?  These are indicators that are set by someone else, and you're now adapting them as your priorities.  So what does that mean in effect?  Well, it means in effect that how we measure research is largely that which is only published in the world in, you know, in the whether it's the ISI or Thomson Reuters types bibliometric indicators.  It means that the arts, humanities, social sciences tend to be underrated.  
[00:09:19]
Local, regional, or nationally-specific issues tend to be underrated because they're not maybe published in international journals.  There are issues around language, because the international language of scholarship is increasingly English; but that has a huge implication for national cultures.  It measures nothing about teaching.  So we actually know very little about how we measure the quality of teaching.  And there's not really a correspondence, despite the fact that some of these rankings do ask, that's a QS, would say, you know, how do you measure, you know, can you say something about the quality of teaching of people?, you know.  Well, I don't know how you could possibly know that.  So the kind of assumptions that are built into it are ones that are based to a large extent on that which is easily measured, as opposed to what's meaningful.  
[00:10:25]
And that's really I think where we run into serious difficulties.  

[00:10:30]
>> Okay, thank you for that.  It sort of leads into in some ways the next question, which links back to the second question.  And I guess I'd like to get a little bit of help in unpacking some of the most significant impacts of world university rankings on debates about higher education, perhaps policy and strategy, but also even institutional strategy and institutional priorities within specific higher education institutions.  So, you know, what kind of changes and impacts are occurring, tangible impacts within universities or systems, and are these impacts generating more inclusion or more exclusion or perhaps both?  So, any response to that?  

[00:11:21]
>> Yeah, I think we're seeing, well, whether or not it's coinciding with other forces, such as what the European Union likes to call the modernization of higher education, professionalization, others might want to call it the managerial change in higher education, we have certainly seen big changes in the way higher education is managed, but also in many cases, the strategic decisions being taken both at institutional and at government level.  And this really has to do with going back to that original comment is, can your institutions act as a beacon to attract global capital and talent?  And if they can't, what can we do to do that?  Because what attracts -- and Moody's has come out with similar types of comments about, you know, your institutions need to becoming increasingly elite; if they're not, then we would be concerned.  
[00:12:33]
So what we're really seeing is this: if your institutions are ranked, and certainly by and large it's a question of being ranked as opposed to not being ranked, and then within the ranking, it's really within the top 100.  So can your country have institutions within the top 100?  And if it can't, what are the implications?  Well, as I said, India at this point in time is quite interesting in this regard, and does a lot of commentary in the newspapers and reported this in the newspaper, and the fact that they've had dialog with both the people in QS and the people in Times Higher.  And they're not the only ones who have engaged directly with the ranking organizations in order to see how they can improve the position of their universities.  The other kinds of things we've seen is, so how do you get your universities there?  Well, higher education has every government budget, unless you've got assets spiraling upwards from tax revenues, we're dealing with either constraints or consensus, they’re certainly a zero-sum game.  
[00:13:46]
So the more you put into one or two institutions has an implication for the others.  And we see a lot of countries now looking around, it could be China started it, but we've got it in Germany, we have it in France, we have it in Vietnam, we have it in Korea, we have it in Russia, we have it in African countries.  We see a lot of places looking to develop, create, or designate one or two world-class universities.  And in the zero-sum game, that inevitably means putting more money into one or two institutions.  Which if we relate that to socioeconomic factors, means that we are looking increasingly at elite institutions.  So what happens to the rest of the country?  And there's beginning to be some research done about the implications of, as we drive more money into certain institutions, what happens to other regions?  
[00:14:50]
Or not just the regions themselves, but the students and the staff that are in the region and the society around it?  And so we have this increasing move towards a more stratified higher education system, developing both in countries partially because of the costs, but partially because of this drive towards world class.  

>>That's a great sort of overview of these sorts of issues.  And it ties, as you noted, with respect to sort of government policy issues and internal strategy issues and so on.  And as I sort of think through the rankings debate, some people have commented that we end up spending a lot of time talking about perhaps impacts, although even more so though about methodology, but we really don't spend actually a lot of time talking about the rankers.  
[00:15:53]
So I'm just curious, why is there so little focus on the nature of the rankers, many of them who are private sector firms, that are driving the development and spread of these tools?  

[00:16:08]
>> A very lucrative industry, it is.  I mean, it would be -— I know you did something on it, but, you know, the issue of the profit and the money being made, it's an enormous industry, not just the rankings, and the multiplicity of them by the slicing and dicing of the data, to serve different audiences.  I mean, it's a classic business model.  But it's the consultancy, because it's become such a factor, influencing government; even at subliminal levels, it influences the public.  Because of the way they are publicized in the media, you know.  Your benchmark could be, does a taxi driver talk about the ranking, the standing, the status?  Everyone wants their country to do well.  So there is a huge industry around it.  
[00:17:10]
Governments consult.  We spend very little time, as you say, discussing any of this.  It is by and large, it's a private-sector commercial activity.  I think Shanghai has also spun out its into a great industry start-up, a university start-up.  So it has become incredibly lucrative.  And I think, probably in fairness, it's taken everyone by surprise.  But in the absence of other simple, you know, it tells complex information simply; and that is its plus and its minus.  

[00:17:56]
>> Thank you.  I guess we might end off in sort of taking into account everything that you've said about the broader sort of history and nature of higher education and how these tools or devices or technologies have come into play, and some of the impacts and values and priorities.  And let's just perhaps situate it, and I'll ask the question really: What big, in other words, important conversations have yet to be held in any serious way about world university rankings and the firms that are and other agencies and actors that are promoting them?  So, for example, it could be about issues of governing rankers, or we've heard discussions of common data sets.  There are debates, and I know this has occurred at the national scale, for example in Canada, where I'm from, about whether universities should pull out of rankings.  But often actually doesn't usually go very far.  
[00:18:59]
So I'm just curious, what big conversations have yet to be held, need to be held, about this phenomena?  

[00:19:06]
>> Yeah, yeah, well, on the latter point about, I'd say I think that the big issue that's out there, and then I'll get onto that precise point of boycotts, that's really up there, is this question of quality.  That, to me, that is the dominant conversation in national policy circles.  And it is from the academies' point of view, the other side of the issue, because, if anything, the thing about rankings effectively illustrates that the control definition of quality is no longer within the domain of higher education or the academy, or indeed arguably within the evaluators or creditors.  Which is a big thing in the US.  
[00:20:06]
Because what we've seen in recent years is the intervention of the EU, with the U-Multirank, with the OECD, with a halo.  In the US, with wellness ratings, looking at value for money, you know, the value proposition.  And has largely, that so the discussion about quality is somewhere else, national agencies, where it might have been institutionally led.  So we're seeing a huge change in that.  And we could also, going back to my original looking at TripAdvisor for my hotel in the summer, say that social networking I think is going to change really quite dramatically, and it could ultimately challenge ranking organizations as well.  But the fact of the matter is that information about higher education performance and indeed academic performance is increasingly out in the public domain, with or without common data sets.  
[00:21:19]
The Australians, the UK, the Catalans, the Mexicans, and I think others, are going to move towards this.  The Irish have just produced something called profiling.  But all this information about institutional performance is now publicly available and on websites that students and the public are encouraged to look at and compare performance.  Now, you could see where that's going to go very quickly.  These are very early days, those things only grow legs.  They're into European content, which is about sucking in national data to Eurostat.  So the idea of boycotting is kind of useless, if I could use that phrase, because the information will be got and accessed anyway.  And it will, and indeed national funding, now, the US is a slightly different matter, but that's where the Obama ratings thing comes in with the Pell Grants.  
[00:22:29]
But certainly for anyone who requires public funding, which is where the Pell Grants come in, in the US; but for others who are more or less dependent on the public purse.  We in Ireland, most of our funding from core activity is government funding.  That information will be there as critical for funding.  So that changes the conversation quite a lot.  So it seems to me that the question of quality is a, remains a big issue, it's still illusory as a concept.  Most of the indicators that we use and are readily available, they're mostly input factors, but they're also measures of wealth or socioeconomic advantage, by and large.  And they privilege the most resource-intensive institutions.  So that, to me, is one of the big unresolved.  
[00:23:29]
I would say the second unresolved is this norming effect on the intellectual footprint of higher ed.  Where that's going, the narrow focus on research, partially because that's the available information.  And there's a very nice term that's used by a colleague, whose name escapes me, from Canada, who talks about the Sheriff of Nottingham effect of effectively, you know, taking money from everyone else in order to fund these elite world-class universities, and the problems of that.  

[00:24:06]
>> Okay, those are a couple of definitely important I guess themes to focus on.  The last thing that I guess comes just out of that really is, in which sort of fora or contexts can some of these debates fruitfully be held?  Intergovernmental agencies?  We've seen universities sometimes talk about cooperating, but there's a lot of competition.  Narrow institutionally-focused objectives inevitably framing their reactions to rankings, their outcomes, for example, or bibliometrics.  So in which sort of context might fruitful and, you know, impact-oriented discussions, policy-formation debates occur?  

[00:24:58]
>> Yeah, I think that's really one of the conundrums is that the higher education community has been so caught up with trying to improve their own institutional performance, that these wider issues have largely been ignored.  There are conversations I think that could take place at UNESCO, it's a possibility.  There's conversations by other international organizations, International Association of Universities, which I know you're also involved with.  There's also other counter, as there are always countertrends, and they see where they go is increasing the attention about the value of systems of higher education.  So in the Irish case, the government, and indeed the higher education authority, have been very deliberate:  
[00:26:03]
We are not pursuing rankings, we are pursuing the value and contribution and quality of the system as a whole, and looking at the quality of the higher education system.  It doesn't mean that each -- and it means not that these institutions are doing the same thing, but it isn't differentiation as stratification, which is another thing we need to be careful of.  But there is an increasing focus.  And I think in some of your US states, there is SUNY, for example, is looking at some of those kinds of issues; which is a different state system than you have in Wisconsin or indeed in California.  So and that is a stepping back and saying, we need to be achieving all of this, the knowledge society is there for everyone, not just for those in elite institutions.  And so I expect I leave here on the point about whether or not in our pursuit of world class, we are transforming higher education into what I would call a self-serving entity, which is less concerned or committed to its nation and region as it pursues its world-class position.  

[00:27:20]
>> Yes.  That's a great final point to end off on, that will be sure no doubt to raise some thoughts and reflections amongst the participants in our MOOC.  So we'd like to say thank you very much for your input and for inevitably generating some debate in this particular week.  So thank you, Ellen.  

[00:27:43]
>> You're very welcome and thank you.  

[00:27:45]
>> Okay, bye bye.  

[00:27:46]
>> Bye.  